my lords be kind enough to turn to common convenience compilation volume 2.
my lords what i had done was taking your lordship through the bare list of dates.
and i have finished the reading of the tenth schedule my lords, and my interpretation of the tenth schedule that i. it's over my lords.
yes. so now i just want your lordship to go through the documentation.
so if my lords have that common convenience compilation volume 2.
first document dated 27th february 2018. ladyship has that?
i got that. it's at page. pdf page 14.
does it start with the indexation at serial number 37 please?
no. ramesh thakur versus state of madras?
my lords, the date is 27th february 2018.
page 14, convenience volume 2, serial number five.
it's called convenience compilation. i'm just trying to check.
what is the pdf page? page 14, pdf 14.
my lords, prior to 2018, the elections took place in shiv sena in 2013.
then they took place in 2018, then they were due to take place in 2023.
so, this only reflects that the last elections took place in 2018, and a letter was written to the election commission
saying organizational elections of shiv sena were conducted on 23rd january 2018, at mumbai and the information regarding the designations and
names of the party office bearers sought by office election commission of india is being endorsed herewith in format of your record.
along with this, along with this letter, the amendments to the constitution were also enclosed.
anyway. yes. then my lords, the office bearer names, your lordship will see.
shiv sena paksh pramukh uddhav thackeray, shiv sena leaders, deputy leaders, secretaries, and all that is set out.
and shiv sena's deputy leaders is my lords, annexure one.
and the national executive meet, held on 23rd january, that set out shiv sena paksh pramukh uddhav thackerayji, appointing the following members as deputy leaders, and
your lordship will see, shiv sena paksh pramukh uddhav thackeray appointing the following members as shiv sena leaders which includes eknath shinde at serial number 4.
your lordship see that? so all this information already sent to the election commission.
serial number four, is at which page?
sorry. serial number four is at what page?
serial number four, my lord is at pdf page 17.
national executive meet held on 23rd january, 20.
correct. normal as the election were due in january 2023, when all this happened.
so,.we're in the midst of a lot of mess.
that's all. now, my lords kindly see, then the party whip.
what is meant by appointing the, appointed the following person that shiv sena leader?
some are elected, some are appointed, but.
but, oh, but appointed the following members of shiv sena leaders to which, to, shiv sena leaders appointed to where?
which platform? rashtriya karya karini, my lords.
for the national executive. yes, yes. oh, i see.
so this is a meeting of the national executive held on 23rd january 2018.
yes, yes. at which these four persons were nominated as members of the national executive for.
yes, the rastriya karya karini. elected are at page 15.
your lordship will see that at page 15, pdf page 15.
yes. you see the elected ones, my lords.
name of office bearers elected. your lordship sees that, fourth column from the left?
yes. so, some are elected, some are nominated.
right. and see if the last column, you say, list of names of leaders and deputy leaders appointed co-opted by shiv sena paksh pramukh, is also attached for your record.
and that's annexure-two my lords. so all this is informed, my lords.
so there are no dispute on any of this.
of course, the election commission ultimately says, i don't have the constitution.
so i will not look at it.
though it was annexed along with this very document, the amendment to the constitution, anyway.
so, then my lords kindly see june 21, pdf page 19.
my lords one other fact, your lordship may be kind enough to note is at page 15, pdf page 728.
15? pdf page? 728. my lords. your lordships will see this is important.
same compilation. yes. this is important because this is dated 25th november 2019.
just note that date. it's important. my lords on that particular day, my lords the uddhav thackeray was neither a member of the legislative council nor was he chief minister.
he was only president of the party.
on 25th november 2019. the reason why i'm inviting my lords’ attention to this document is, please have a look at it.
it is to the honourable speaker, legislative assembly.
the shiv sena. ladyship has it? 715 did you say?
715, yes. shiv sena's newly elected mlas meeting was convened at shiv sena bhavan on wednesday, 31st october.
meeting was chaired by uddhav thackeray, shiv sena paksh pramukh.
all the newly elected mlas of shiv sena party unanimously resolved that all the decisions of
today's meeting be decided by uddhav thackeray and authorized uddhav thackeray to take on the decisions.
shri eknath shinde and sunil prabhu were appointed as group leader and chief whip of shiv sena legislature party in the maharashtra legislative assembly.
resolution passed in this are regard as follows.
'that it is resolved that elected mlas meeting of shiv sena party of the party with eknath shinde
is appointed as group leader.' so he becomes the leader my lords of the house in a sense.
'and it is resolved that in the newly elected mlas meeting of the shiv sena party
sunil prabhu is appointed as the chief whip.' so their the appointment is by the party.
this is information to the speaker. that's right.
that's information to the speaker. that's how it happens my lords.
when the leader of the house, my lords, or the leader of the opposition, that's how the party conveys the.
this letter is addressed by shri uddhav thackeray.
that's correct. just see. because that last the signature doesn't appear there.
that's why i just asked. oh. maybe.
maybe right also because it's addressed by those.
it doesn't matter, my lords. it's an information of the decision of the party to appoint these two people as the leader, group leader, as well as the chief whip.
yes. it is chaired by the uddhav thackeray and it says the party has appointed.
there's no doubt about that. first para itself says so my lords.
no. it was in the meeting of the mlas ?
no, no shiv sena's. meeting was convened by shiv sena bhavan.
and the meeting was chaired by uddhav thackeray.
all the newly elected members unanimously resolved that all decisions of today's meeting will be decided by uddhav thackeray.
okay. okay. now read a resolution number one.
yes, 'it is resolved in the newly elected mlas meeting. mlas meeting of so and so. that he is appointed resolution. yes. he is appointed as a
group leader of the shiv sena party. resolve the newly elected mla meeting of shiv sena party. sunil prabhu is appointed as the chief whip the shiv
sena. so this was a resolution which was communicated was, prima facie subject to what you can say, the elected mlas meeting was convened. it was resolved
like one and two, which was intimated to the speaker. yes. but no my lords, the decision was of the uddhav thackeray. it's the decision of uddhav thackeray.
it doesn't appear to be so mr. it says so.
my lords, the first paragraph. first and the second paragraph both.
first and second paragraph both says so.
second says - the meeting was chaired and third says - elected mlas unanimously resolved that all decisions of today's meeting be decided by thackeray .
uddhav thackeray. so he is and. authorized uddhav thackeray to take all the decisions of the meeting.
the decision is of uddhav thackeray.
but having said that, it also appears that the decision attains a certain degree of legitimacy because it is communicated by the mlas to the speaker, it appears, it
may be, that of course, as the unquestioned party leader at that time, he was to decide who would be the group leader and who would be the chief whip.
but the communication to the speaker is signed by all the 56 mlas and they eventually resolve that who will be the group leader and the chief whip.
it seems to be that.
as i showed your lordship, the law on the subject and the decision of the subject, it will be clear that it is only the party that appoints.
no, no member of the legislature.
i understand that, because your submission yesterday was that the appointment of the chief whip or the group leader is something which is never done by the.
never done. it's always done by the party.
i'll do. yes my lords.
so your second limb of the submission was, if there is a split, that split also, of course, there's no concept of
a split in the tenth schedule, but even assuming there's a split in the party, that split is outside the legislative assembly.
correct. and it can't be that the 56 mlas decide that, well, we have now merged or we have.there is a split in our party.
it is settled law as i mean, i'm just indicating this is how it happened.
but it is settled law, that as far as the whip is concerned, and that's in answer to my
lord's question, as far as the whip is concerned and the leader is concerned, it's always decided by the party.
that you said yesterday. yes. i'm just saying the process was in this particular case this, say if a letter is written, i don't my lords we will find out.
i'll find out. the letter is communicated.
and mr. sibal, on that you may be right also for this reason that a whip is a direction to the elected members
of the legislature, whether it's in parliament or a legislative assembly or council that you shall vote in a particular manner, or this
is our position on this particular aspect, on the discussion on a bill, or whatever you are doing as a. as an elected legislator.
therefore that direction to the members is also always.
always by the whip. offside, outside the.
outside, yes. outside the legislature. i'm sorry.
i'm sorry. show the relevant rules of the legislature.
i will, in fact, my lords, i will show that and it will be clarified.
but my lord is right that from the perspective of the format, your lordship may be right that it is forwarded, but we will have to check that.
but assuming it doesn't make difference to the substance of.
mr. sibal, why don't we take, go straight to the rules of the, because the rules of the assembly must be telling us how a chief whip is nominated.
how a group leader is. would be.
the rules of the assembly don't say that.
there is no rule of the assembly.
but this is what has been decided.
but this is the convention in every political party.
why my lords? because the legislators come into the house on the basis of the symbol given and the election my lords.
pursuant to by which they are in the house.
they are governed by the discipline of the party, not their internal discipline in the house and that discipline of the party.
i will please. so the rules, mr. sibal, the rules of the legislative assembly are silent?
there is no guidance?
no, no, there is no. but there is also my lords, there is a particular rule, maharashtra legislature members removal of disqualification act, under which it is made clear.
that your lordship will find at page 140 of the statute compilation.
just let's go there. let's quickly go to that.
let's quickly go there. mr. sibal, anything here in this compilation so that we are closing it now.
we're closing this compilation screen so we can go, if there's something else to be shown here, you can quickly show us and then go to the rule.
my lords let's see this as this question has arisen, then i'll go back.
so, we might as well complete it from this part here.
just let's complete this part. mr. sibal, if i may?
please look at page 710, pdf 723.
just in case the essence of the english translation has been lost.
this is the same document letter at 710.
the same letter that you were pointing out, 25th november 19.
it's in marathi and that probably will be the essence, because it's a translation that you have shown us.
my lords, the chief. perhaps chief can throw more light on that.
hon'ble mr. justice.
it says 'guruwar, dinank 31 october 2019 roji'- i am sure, my learned brothers will get some flavour of it -' roji
shiv sena bhavan, dadar mumbai yethe shiv sene pakshachya navnirvachit amdaranchi baithak shiv sena paramukh mananiya shri uddhavji thackeray yanchya upasthitit sampann jhali.
maharashtra rajya vidhansabha nivadanuk 2019 madhe nivadun aalelya sarv navnirvachit amdarani baithakichi suruwatilach ya baithakit honyarya nirnayanche sarvasvi adhikar adhyaksh mhanun shiv sena paramukh shri uddhavji thackeray yana dile.
yapramane baithakit maharashtra rajya vidhimandalatil shiv sena pakshachya gatneta mhanun amadar shri eknath sambhaji shinde va vidhansabhetil mukhya pratod mhanun amadar shri sunil prabhu yanchi ekmatane nivad karnyat aali.
ya donhi nivadinche donhi tharav pudhilpramane aahet.
' so it says that, well, all the decisions, they have power to take all the decisions are entrusted to mr. uddhav thackeray and an
election was then held at which so and so was nominated as a group leader, and so and so was nominated as the chief whip.
that is what i thought. my lords.
the adhikar was given to him. and then it is sort of ratified by all the mlas.
so my lords, kindly come to pdf 55 of the statute compilation.
this is what it is. 55. oh, sorry 140.
sorry.
and then tharav kramank ek also says - 'shiv sena pakshachya navnirvachit amdarnchya ya baithakit tharav karnyat yet aahe ki
shiv sena pakshachya vidhimandal gatnete padi amadar shri eknath sambhaji shinde yanchi nivad karnyat yet aahe.' that's the resolution .
my lords, the statute compilation just and then i'll come back to the other documents.
let's clear this issue my lords. 140.
now kindly see my lords at 142.
pdf 142. these are my lords, the maharashtra legislature members removal of disqualification act and removal of certain disqualifications.
see paragraph 2 at page 142, section 2, at page 142.
142? i hope your lordship are feeling much better today.
little better yes. thank you. just professional hazards.
page 142 section 2.
'a person shall not be disqualified from being chosen as of being a member of the maharashtra legislative assembly or maharashtra legislative
council nearly by reason of the fact that he holds any of the offices specified in schedule 1. and that at 145.
you have schedule 1 my lords. 23, item 23 there is the 'offices of the chief whip or whip in the maharashtra state legislature'.
now kindly read the explanation with me if your lord ships and ladyship has it.
'the offices of the chief whip - the expression chief whip or whip in relation to the maharashtra legislative assembly
means that member of the house, who is for the time being declared by the party. was it redacted? i'm sorry?
it's actually highlighted it. so much so that there is nothing except yellow here.
already highlighted. mere pass hai. it's all just yellow.
why, my lords? how? they must have highlighted it and then scanned it.
so it has come black. i'm sorry, my lords for this.
it's surprising. i was also wondering that i have not done it.
i am surprised myself. doesn't matter. you don't read it slowly then i think.
you can give us a copy later.
but now you can read. i can pass on my lords.
i can share it. on a returnable basis or what?
pass on another one, please i have, mine is fine.
just give another for the chief justice, please.
no, i have. my pen drive is okay.
okay. now, may i read my lords?
yes, yes.
the expression chief whip or whip, in relation to the maharashtra legislative assembly means, that member of the house, that member of
the house, who is for the time being declared by the party forming the government to be the chief whip or whip
in that house and recognized as such by the speaker and includes a member of the house who is for the time
being declared as such by the party, having at least 10% of the total members of the house and recognized as such by the speaker.
the expression chief whip or whip in relation to the maharashtra legislative assembly means the member of the house, that member of the house who is for the time
being declared by the party forming the government to be the chief whip or whip in that house and recognize as such by chairman and includes a member of
the house who is for the time being declared as such by the party, having at least 10% of the total members of the house and recognized as such.
it's clear, my lords, this is, there's no doubt about these things, my lords, i read to your lordship yesterday, in fact, the communication by the chairperson
of the upa to the chairman of the rajya sabha that after mr. ghulam nabi azad, mr. kharge is the leader, is the leaders of the legislative party.
so on this there is no, really no issue my lords.
yes. now my lords, now i come back to volume-2, page 17.
then this is my lords, 21st of june, the meeting of all members of the shiv sena, pdf 19.
pdf 19. pdf 19 of convenience compilation, volume-2.
i am coming back to that compilation list.
page 6 otherwise. party whip.
party whip, a meeting of all members of the legislative assembly on tuesday on 21st
june at 12:30 has been arranged at the honourable chief justice, chief minister's residence varsha bungalow.
therefore, all members of the shiv sena should positively remain present for the said meeting.
so that's how the issue starts. and this is given by the party whip.
and those who were present, they have signed it.
we don't have to go into that at the moment.
so typed copy is there. and then kindly come to page, pdf page 32.
as per whip, my lords have 32 pdf?
as per whip issued by the chief speaker of shiv sena shri sunil prabhu, the meeting of members of the shiv sena party
was concluded on tuesday, 21st of june, at chief minister's residence at varsha bungalow, and under the chairmanship of the party president uddhav ji.
in the meeting, the following resolution was passed unanimously.
resolution eknath shinde, the member of legislative assembly has been removed forthwith as the post of group leader of shiv sena legislative party, ajay
choudhary member of legislative assembly has been immediately elected unanimously on the post of group leader of shiv sena legislative party that has become vacant.
a copy of the aforesaid resolution vide article 180 as a constitution, be forward it to the hon'ble
vice president maharashtra legislative assembly, who is discharging the duties of the post of president maharashtra legislative assembly.
presented by ravindra waikar and uday samant and the others.
so my lords we changed him, the party's decision to remove him as the group leader.
then comes my lords, pdf page 34.
again on 21st of june. yes, we communicated this decision to the deputy speaker and that your lordship will see to the vice president maharashtra legislative assembly.
page? it is actually vice president is the wrong translation.
it's the deputy speaker. at page 34 pdf page 34.
' a meeting of members of shiv sena legislative party was held under the chairmanship of so and so.
in this meeting the following resolution was passed and that is sent for appropriate action.
' your lordship see that. you don't have to read the whole document.
sent for appropriate action. then pdf page 36.
again 21st of june, because the party decides to make ajay choudhary the group leader that
also is communicated to the deputy speaker and that your lordship will find at page 36.
i don't have to read it,just the waste of time.
'that i am directed to inform you this is the request made vide above letter to record approval to the election of shri ajay choudhary,
member of the legislative assembly to the post has been accepted by the president maharashtra legislative assembly.' so he accepts that, deputy speaker accepts that.
that's how the process is my lords, party conveys to the deputy speaker.
deputy speaker accepts it. that's in all assemblies in india, including parliament.
then my lords kindly come to. could the resolution which you read, the communications.
one removing mr. eknath shinde. correct? and appointing ajay choudhary, were in the meeting of the legislative party.
please see. yes, yes. they were not the decisions taken.
other resolutions were passed in the party meeting.
that doesn't happen my lords. that never happens.
what happens. just to clarify my point.
both these resolutions were in the meeting of a legislative party.
yes. i'll tell your lordship why. my lords what happens is it's the legislative party that has to accept a leader.
there is always a consultation with the party, the party is represented by uddhav thackeray.
just what we want to say, just speaking of myself it was not in the meeting of the party.
no, it is never. it is never my lords.
it is never. i'm explaining that to you, explaining that.
ultimately, my lords, a group leader or a leader in the house has to be chosen right?
so what the party whip and what the leader of the party does is, calls the legislators and says, who would you like to leap in the leader.
they take their view, and the party takes the decision.
it's not a party meeting, your lordship is right.
it doesn't happen in the like in the aicc or the dpcc.
it happens my lords with the leader, namely, the chairperson, the chairperson, or the prime minister
my lords, acting in his capacity as the head of the bjp, he will be consulted.
but it's why? because it is the legislative members who have to accept somebody as a leader.
so the decision is given by the party that this is the person who is.we choose as the leader.
now you cannot. this is not.doesn't happen in the plenary my lords.
that's the process and i will demonstrate that.
your lordship is absolutely right. because ultimately, my lords who has to work?
somebody within the legislature is to work with the leader.
so they are the ones who are concerned.
so their views will be taken and the party will decide.
so therefore they say, okay, let's uddhav thackeray decide, we will accept what you say.
that's how it happens. so according to you.
the decision in the legislative party meeting would always be on the advice of the party?
always. that's right. always. and it's recognized by this court my lords in several decisions.
so actually and this is a practice.
this is a norm everywhere in every political party.
leader as well as whip, both you are saying?
sorry? leader as well as the whip.
that's right. that's right. my lords, what happens, may i just explain that also?
leadership will decide who the chief whip will be, leadership will decide who the group leader will be but the chief whip
will decide, not pursuant to, chief whip will decide carry out the instructions of the leader when matters are in the house.
there the leader doesn't come in. chief whip will say, we'll go to the leader and say, look, this is the issue before the house.
how do we deal with it? leader will discuss it with the chief whip.
chief whip will communicate. that's how parliamentary democracy works.
yes. but your lordship is absolutely right, it's a good point that your lordship have pointed out so that i can clarify it.
then my lords, kindly see 22nd of june.
in the backdrop of causing party crossing over and thereby attempting to destabilize the government and considering the consequential political situation that has been created
in the state and an urgent meeting has been arranged on 22nd of june at 05:00, at varsha bungalow, mount crescent road to face such situations.
your presence for this meeting is necessary, which please note, the said notice has been forwarded on your email id
registered in the maharashtra legislative assembly that apart, that apart you have also been informed through social media whatsapp and sms.
you cannot remain absent for this meeting unless valid and sufficient reason in writing is given.
if you fail to remain present for the meeting, it will be presumed that you have clear intention to leave membership of shiv sena party
voluntarily as a result of which action is provided in the constitution of india with respect to disqualification of members will be taken against you.
note of which is taken. this is communicated to eknath shinde, by whom?
by the whip. by sunil prabhu, who represents the party.
so, is it a typo at the end of that chief speaker?
it should be chief whip? yes, it's chief whip my lords, it's not chief speaker.
it must be a translation issues. yes, it's a, i was reading the marathi.
it's chief whip. yes, and then my lords, the 22nd june notice is sent, which is pdf-39.
in the background of the recent concluded maharashtra legislative council elections held on 20th of june, and in view of
the volatile political situation emerging in the state, on account of repeated attempts being made to destabilize the government by
orchestrating defections within the shiv sena and to discuss and draw out a political strategy to address and contain any such exigency.
you are urgently called upon to attend the meeting of the shiv sena legislative party today, on 22nd to be held at so and so place.
please note that failure to participate in the meeting without providing valid and adequate reasons in writing, communicated
in advance to the undersign will result in consequential action against you under the relevant provisions of the constitution.
this notice is being sent on email address provided by the legislators and registered with the maharashtra assembly along with soft copies being served on sms and whatsapp as well.
this again is sent by the chief whip my lords.
and next document is page 40, pdf page 40, 22nd of june, says subject notice of shiv sena legislative party meeting.
an emergency meeting has been organized on wednesday 22nd june at 05:00 p.m. at varsha whatever, to deal with situation as there
is an attempt to destabilize the government by shifting parties in the background and therefore the political situation created in the state.
it is important to note that this meeting requires your presence.
notice has been sent to you by email you have registered with the maharashtra legislative assembly in addition to you then sms, whatsapp.
it should be noted that if you do not attend then you're liable in accordance with the constitution.
action will be taken. this is sent by the chief whip, and then this is sent to all these people and they don't attend.
then your lordship may go straight away.
what is the annexure 10? annexure? annexure 10, that is the next page of pdf 41.
that's for people my lords, people who attended, and those people who didn't attend.
so attended? that's right. that's what it is.
yes. now my lords, now comes the document which is crucial for this case.
what is that document mr. sibal? this is at pdf 51.
this communication, which i have read, was sent to eknath shinde my lords, by the chief whip.
now eknath shinde replies to it. just one second.
not eknath shinde but hopefully.
<unclear> sunil prabhu by eknath shinde. now kindly see to sunil prabhu. this document. now it says, 'you have misused the authenticate letter of the office of the shiv
sena legislative party. meeting of 45 mlas of shiv sena party was held under the chairmanship of honourable group leader eknath shinde. and in the said meeting you have
been unanimously removed from the post of chief speaker of the party, chief whip of the party shiv sena mla bharat gogawale has been appointed as a post of
chief speaker. chief whip of the legislative assembly. as per letter of 22nd june shiv sena legislative party office. despite you having no authority to sign has send to
me a notice which is legally invalid. you have no right to send me the said notice. therefore it is not binding upon me to remain present.' now my
lords, this act, the fact that you did not attend the meeting the fact that you wrote this letter, the fact that you appointed the chief whip. you 45
people or whoever, whether it's 40 or 45 at the moment, we are not on that, that you are members of the legislative assembly. you have appointed your own
chief whip. you have you say that you are no longer the whip, is all. there is no as far as i am concerned. my lords, this is per-se
illegal. this doesn't terminate from the party. they cannot. members of the legislature cannot my lord pass such a resolution. cannot defy the whip. cannot remove the whip. so
the 40 odd members my lords sitting in assam convert themselves into the party and decide to remove everybody. the next document is at page 52, again june 22nd
2022. same thing that- 'you have misused the official letterhead in a meeting of 45 mlas, under the chairmanship of group leader eknath shinde. you have been unanimously removed
from the position of chief whip.' so he is acting as a group leader of the members of the legislature. so therefore, my lords let's put it in simple
terms. in any assembly, ten people can get together and remove my lords, the chief whip and then they can go to the opposite party and my lords with
the numbers' game that is going on, they can remove, the they can actually destabilize the government and have their own chief minister. this is what. this is the
outcome, if, if this is upheld to be. if this is held to be valid. if such an exercise is held to be valid, the outcome is that you
can remove, an elected government can be removed anytime, depending on the arithmetic. to put it in the flip side. therefore, mr. sibal, your contention would be then if
this outcome has to be lawfully achieved of removing the chief whip or the group leader. then what is the course of action to be followed according to you?
you have to go to the party. call up, call a meeting of the party. call the meeting of the party or you merge. party would mean the the
national executive or what would be meaning? if you have to call my lords. the national executive. the pratinidhi sabha, the general body, the pratinidhi sabha. not the karyakarini
my lords. that's a 13 member. the pratinidhi sabha has 262 odd members. my lords, point is, they have never been to the party. of course, the only chink
in that submission. i mean, we must put it to you straight so that you can deal with it, is that, that was not the process which was originally
followed when the chief whip or the group leader was nominated unless, unless we also postulate that when the group leader and the chief whip were originally nominated, uddhav
thackeray was acting as the party. yes, because he was neither member of the council, nor was he the chief minister. he was nothing. he is the paksha pramukh,
under the constitution. one thing as brother justice m r shah pointed out, very clear is it's obvious that the appointment and the nomination of the group leader and
the chief whip was made by at a meeting of the mlas. now because it clearly says 'amadaranchya baithakit.' i will answer that straightaway my lords. but it is
also in the presence of mr. thackeray and the mlas begin by saying that we are assigning to mr. uddhav thackeray the right to take all decision. then they
pass a resolution at the meeting of the mlas. so, it's a sort of a hybrid situation where the group leader powered to nominate a group leader and the
chief whip is delegated to shri uddhav thackeray. but there is a so to speak, an anointment of them at the meeting of the mlas. so the only way
really that can be, the two can be reconciled is by postulating that in that sense, that at the original meeting, mr. uddhav thackeray was the party. he was
whether you like it or not, he was the party. it was not a meeting of the national executive. it was not about a member of meeting of the
plenary of the party, but he was really the whole and soul because he was not an elected member at that point of time at all. he was the
president of the party. he is the president. paksha pramukh. he was the paksha pramukh? yes. my lords, that's, it's very interesting you have raised this. your lordship raised
this, let's analyse it. let's analyse the circumstances against me. let's assume this all can be done within the legislature. i'll assume that my lords that the party has
no role. so my lords therefore 50 people in the house can actually have a leader in the house without reference to the party, if that logic is accepted.
50 members of the house can actually oust the party whip appointed by the party. that's the consequence. when were the elections held? 2018. the first document that page
pdf 14. 23rd january, 2018. 17th february, 2018. no, but that's the communication, but the elections are 23rd january 2018. 23rd january, it speaks about that. yes. the point
that i'm making to your lordship, is this is unheard of, in any democracy, in any legislature. elections were held on 23-01-18 you said? yes, yes. my lords it
will be entirely unworkable because you will then say that there is no relationship between the members of the legislature and the party. they are independent of the parties.
they can take whatever decision they like. it will be destructive of, if you ask me the basic structure of a system of governance which allows the party and
the legislatures to be intertwined in matters where the decisions have to be taken on various very significant issues as they come up in the assembly or in parliament.
mr. sibal, you can tell me later, but what i want to know is, this letter speaks about organizational elections. yes. it talks about organizations. that's corrections. so what
are this? it is to the different tiers, is it? yes, it is in different tiers. so, there is something called a general body, is it? there is a
rashtriya karyakarini, which is the national executive, 13 members. then there is the pratinidhi sabha, which is about 262 members. what is at the bottom? sorry? what is representing
the general body? pratinidhi sabha. pratinidhi sabha. pratinidhi sabha. my lords of course you can't hold a meeting of all the members of the party all over maharashtra. i
am just asking for information. right. there is a tier system, there's a tier system. it is virtually like a general body. yeah, there is a tier system, by
which people are both appointed and elected. appointed. pratinidhi sabha? yes, pratinidhi sabha. and mr. sibal, possibly this line of argument of yours is also buttress by 2b of
the tenth schedule which says if he votes or abstains from voting in such house, contrary to the direction issued by the political party to which he belongs or
by any person or authority authorized by it in this behalf. that's correct. so the whip is really a person who is authorized by the political party. that's correct.
that's how it functions. because the direction has to be given by the political party. it can't keep on giving a direction. it's a larger body. so therefore it
delegates its power and is authorizes a person who will then issue a direction on which way to vote in the assembly. and the matter, when it came up
before the law commission it will be disastrous for democracy, disastrous for the country if the legislature party is allowed to act independent of the political party. so the
actual whip, without it says all by any personal authority authorized by it in the. i read that, yes. so the party really nominates or authorizes a person. that's
correct. and the act of defection lies in voting or abstaining from voting contrary to a direction given by the party or by that person. i want to ask
myself, supposing, there's a bill in parliament, the legislature party on its own can't decide what the position will be. it cannot. naturally, they'll have to be consultation with
the party because they are not living in asylum. they are not acting in as a separate entity. they are the really the voice of the party in parliament
or the state legislator. that's correct. it's the political party. the genus is the party. they are the species. political party either sends the mlas, who because of majority
form the government or they could even send members of legislative assembly who will be sitting in the opposition. so nevertheless, the controlling factor is the political party which
will through its mlas operate either as because they are there because of the party. they are the mandate is the mandate of the party and therefore, how they
function in the house is determined by the mandate which has brought them into the house. and i think that is seems to be a fair understanding of the
tenth schedule. my lords you have to maintain the integrity of the political party within the house. it's programs, its views, it's views on reservations, it's views on tenth
schedule. it's views on foreign policy. individual members of the legislature don't decide on foreign policy issues. but the party decides. and party systems are such that you have
committees where my lords, people who are in the past also were members of the party who have experience in foreign policy, ex ministers of foreign policy, they become
members of the committee. they advise the party as to what position should be taken and a matter comes up the legislators are only told that this is what
should be done within that framework you can make your case out. so they articulate the views of the party in the house. that's correct. one important distinction. just
to take 15 seconds of bizarre example of how the party governs. with very interesting approval lordship. i happened to be chairman of the parliamentary standing committee in 2011,
and the most contentious lokpal bill came. we had a report signed by all except three descents. three descents and every 31 member committee which is a mini parliament.
everybody signed. all political parties 70 political parties. matter went to rajya sabha. all of them supported the report because they had signed it. overnight my lords the party
stand of one particular party, i'll not name it, changed. the matter came to lok sabha. the same party which has signed took a different stand lok sabha because
the instructions from the party to the legislative wing of the lok sabha was that - no this has to be opposed. lok pal has to be opposed. this
is in the record of parliament. so my lords, the party decides. this is an extreme example that the party which had agreed with the report, actually opposed it
in lok sabha because the members are only legislators, but they received the instructions. it's an important, well known regional party. but the policy changed that - no, we
must oppose lok pal. so they opposed in lok sabha. that is validation of this kind of example. any number of examples like that any number of examples. it's
a reverse engineering. it's a political factor. legislative members controlling the party is actually reverse engineering. yes, your lordship is right. exactly. therefore, these documents become exceptionally important because
they determine the outcome of this litigation. if you give validity and legality. so mr. sibal, we have seen all the documents now? not yet my lords no, because
the next step i was going to request you to formulate it in two or three submissions for us. but you can complete the documents and then give us.
yes, yes i will. give us a formulations of two or three. my lords and then i have to read your lordship some judgments which actually deal with this.
before we go into the judgments, you can just formulate it for us in two or three submissions. yes, yes. i will take it down. but let's complete the
document, then formulation, and then the judgment. yes, let me just quickly go through the documents now. yes. so page 52, i have read. then kindly come to my
lords, resolution of the meeting of the shiv sena maharashtra legislative assembly 1990 to 2024. that document is at page 50.pdf-55. now this is what is passed, very interesting.
what is the date? my lords it is signed by bharat gogawale. very interesting document. this tells you the story. resolution of the meeting of the shiv sena legislative
assembly, maharashtra legislative assembly 1990 to 2024, we the following members of the 14th maharashtra legislative assembly belonging to the shiv sena. we are notified as the members of
the maharashtra legislative assembly as members of shiv sena legislature party, we had unanimously elected eknath sambhaji shinde on 31st october 2019 as group leader of the shiv sena
legislature party. there was a pre-poll alliance between the bhartiya janata party and shiv sena party for the 14th maharashtra legislative assembly. there has been great dissatisfaction prevalence among
the members of our party shiv sena and our party cadre at large on account of corruption in the government administrations regarding police posting, corruption by then home minister
so and so, sitting minority minister so and so. apart from above reasons our party cadre faced tremendous harassment and distress on political as well as personal grounds from
the opposition. ideological parties who are now a part of the government and were using their office and power to undermine the base and the foundation of shiv sena.
there is enormous discontent amongst the cadres of our party shiv sena for forming the government with ncp and inc, who are ideologically opposed to our party. there has
been a compromise on the principles of our party shiv sena, which has been a party of fierce ideological base and was formed for fighting for the rights of
local marathi people. for last two and a half years, our party and its leadership have compromised party principles by aligning with the contrasting ideologies for the sake of
achieving power. the ideology of our party leader late balasaheb thackeray was to give clean and honest government to the people of maharashtra and also without compromising on the
principle of hindutva, which was defeated on the first day itself by aligning with the opposing ideologies. shiv sena and bhartiya party has forged a pre-poll alliance for 2019
maharashtra assembly. they saw the blessings of the voters of the sena bjp alliance, which the voters accepted and voted in favour of alliance. after results were out the
shiv sena severed, it's ties with the bjp and formed an alliance of the opposing parties which they had fought against in 2019. this act of our party leaders
had a tremendous negative impact upon the voters and the party cadre. there was a continuous hue and cry towards party leadership for the act of aligning with the
opposing parties. ignoring this party leadership went ahead and formed the maha vikas aghadi government. for the last two and a half years, we the shiv sena legislative party
members were facing tremendous pressures from the electorate. we the members of the legislative party as well as all leaders and workers throughout the country, were facing a lot
of humiliating questions. our leader, balasaheb thackeray, was always a strong nationalist. we've also been subjected to a lot of criticism for being part of the corrupt maharashtra. in
view of the above, the members of the maharashtra shiv sena legislative party have met today and resolved this under. what has they resolved? hereby resolved and reaffirmed that
shinde, who was appointed as leader of shiv sena legislative party, is in continuation to be the leader of the shiv sena legislative party of the 14th maharashtra legislative
assembly. and this is proposed and seconded by members of the legislature and i hereby further resolve that bharat gogawale elected and appointed as chief whip of the 14th
maharashtra legislative assembly is cancelled with immediate.and sunil prabhu is cancelled with immediate effect, proposed and seconded. now my lords, there is no reference to any meeting of the
party. there is no reference to any grievance made prior to this date. they are all members. he was serving as a minister for two and a half years.
there is no reference to any grievance that he has ever had. no reference. no reference to any statement he made in any organizational election. this suddenly could not
have happened on the 21st june my lords. this sudden realization that this grave injustice has been done my lords. obviously, this was planned. my lords if anybody had
any grievance of this nature, it would be in public statements. it will be in organizational meetings. after all, this is from 2018. we are in 2023 now my
lords. not a single statement anywhere, so obviously. and what this statement is being made from assam. why assam? so it not something. it's all pre-planned. it's a conspiracy.
it's not something that happened overnight and you are talking about poll promises. let me my lords, talk of history then. my lords the poll promise was broken at
the time when my lords devendra fadnavis and ajit pawar were sworn in the early hours of the morning by the governor. what about that poll promise? so let's
not go into politics. i was just going to say that now you're clinching into. no, no. politics. no, but this is all politics. you're now leaving the area
of constitution. no, no. i know. i said it in the context of the grievance that he has made. he has made a grievance of poll promise. that's why
i said we are. i'm sorry. i'm sorry but but therefore, mr. sibal, ultimately, i mean, we are just sort of pushing your argument to its logic and conclusion
in constitutional terms. therefore, what you are saying is that look, when eknath shinde was nominated as a group leader and the whip was then nominated. the whip was
also notified. it was at the behest of the party. be at the mlas meeting. an alteration of that position was made at the meeting, which was chaired by
mr. uddhav thackeray, the legislatives could not have either abstained from the meeting, which was convened by the party president nor could the legislators have replaced, the whip or
the group leader. that's correct. so that all that they did was really therefore invited. was contrary to law, and therefore invited a disqualification under the tenth schedule. all
this, really then leads us to this that, therefore they have incurred the disqualification. they have incurred disqualification. that is correct. now, having said that therefore, this is, therefore
case where the speaker has to ultimately decide upon the disqualification which they have incurred, isn't it? mr. sibal, that is an area which we are not able to
come to bridge. i will my lords. i will. yes. i made that argument. yes, i will try. of course the constitutional position of the speaker to decide. i'll
tell your lordship the problem in that in that area. but. there are still problems in the area. we see that. but, you know also we understand the significance
of the point which you have made, which is a very significant point for constitutional democracy that ultimately the party is supreme and legislators get there into the house
or the parliament or the legislative assembly on the mandate of the party. what the party means to the people. therefore, you are really elected as a representative of
the party. your behaviour must be governed by what the party dictates and a group of legislators, whether you are one-third or 1/10 even 75%, cannot be really determinative
of the wishes of the parties. you can alter that position if the party authorizes you or you leave the party. so far, so good. i mean, that's a
very significant point which you have made. but. i understand. but my point is the next point what is the consequence. which you are really telling us that look
the facts stare you, now why go to the speaker. that what my submission is what is it that the speaker is going to do in this. it could
be twofold. one - as you say. well, the speaker himself cannot be trusted, as an impartial arbitrator. i withdraw that my lords because we are talking about the
constitutional position. the second would be where the facts are so clear then you take the decision with your speaker ought to have to decided. that there is only
one and one conclusion. that's right. that mr sibal, honestly, that is, that is the matter of disquiet for speaking for myself. i mean should the court be taken
into that, entering into that area. that's an area. lordships have been persuaded it in the past. i hope they pursued it in the future. there are very serious
ramifications. i'll address that my lordships. the ramifications which you have referred to for constitutional democracy if individual legislators start bucking the party discipline there are very serious ramifications
that we start taking over these functions. very dangerous. no, my lords, what happened was in one particular case which is the constitution bench my lords where they said
that this illegality cannot be continued even for a day. so we will take the decision. they're occupying the post of the minister. this cannot continue even for a
day. i will not send it back. right or wrong, this is the system which we have now assumed to ourselves as we the people and when the courts
try and breach the system there is a very. no. my lords i understand. that's what is worrying us. i put it to you right up quite frankly, quite
frankly, a constitutional court should be worried, because if you create this as a precedent, it can happen in other situations as well, and that will not be a
good precedent. my lords, i am not disputing that. please, please. i am not. i know the limitations of a constitutional court. i know that my lords. but what
has happened in this case, unfortunately, is that this has happened because of a judicial order. this would never have happened. alright we also go to this extent that,
you know, if some.a situation transpires because of a judicial order, we are not saying that it has. i understand, i understand. .your argument. and therefore it's the duty
of a court to rectify a situation which emerges as a result of its own order. that's right. alright? in various other contexts we always say. you have said
that in several judgments my lord. but assuming that is so, and we place ourselves in the position in which the court was say immediately before the 27th, what
would the court then have done that look let the speaker decide keeping aside the issue of 2 day or 7 day notice. yes. yes. let the speaker decide.
yes. so if we have to restore the position as it would have been but for that order of the 27th, we would have said, let the speaker decide.
possibly your argument would be if the. until the speaker is deciding no trust vote. let them take a decision first and then because the trust vote. because everything
happened.after that happened because of this order. but therefore if you have to restore the situation as it stands immediately before the interim order of this court, we can
restore it by saying that, well, the speaker has to take a. yes. had they incurred a disqualification. but we, it would be very difficult for us to take
over that function. my lords, i don't mind. let that deputy speaker decide. i have no problem with that. that's what happened. which deputy speaker? the speaker my lords
who was denied the, who was denied the right to continue with the disqualification. this has happened in the other case. so then we restore a putative state of
affairs. yes your lordship have done that. completely overtaken by events. in nabam rebia, your lordship have done exactly that. exactly that. because when i argued this before the
constitution bench then, i said my lords what is happening is you let things happen, and then you will tell me later that we can't reverse it. he said,
no, we will reverse it. mr. sibal, then you support nabam rebia's course of action, when it suits you. and when nabam rebia is creating a problem you wanted
to. no my lords, there are two different issues in nabam rebia, my lords. alright. i'm sorry, my lords, you cannot put that argument. no, no, not at all.
they are two different issues my lord. my lords, in fact, i was wondering when your lordship are going to decide to refer it to seven, because this is
a real problem. because that's intrinsically at the heart of the matter which is why i said you take it up as a preliminary submission because ultimately this can
only be decided. but mr. sibal, look at the consequence. you today have a speaker. you have a speaker in a democratically elected house. tomorrow you may have a
speaker in parliament. can the supreme court say sorry, we are now overriding the mandate of this speaker? we will retrace our steps back to say now, something which
is eight months ago, restore a speaker who is now no longer holding the office of the speaker. and we tell you we now decide that somebody is the
speaker. he is still deputy speaker. huh! he is still deputy speaker. and ask that. but he is still deputy speaker my lords. .take a consequence. i mean. he
is still deputy speaker. my lords, all right. one second, one second, one second, hold on, you got a lot of hurdles to cross. but anyway let me. they
're all very seasoned, constitutional laws but you know what is worrying us. you understand what is worrying us. i am not going to make a proposition that will
in fact destroy the fabric of a constitutional structure that has been placed since independence, since we are a republic. i am not going to do that. but see
what has happened. first of all, the no stays they are given time till 12th july, but more important, on the 29th, this court says that we will set
aside everything that happens thereafter. see my lords where we are now. we say please stay everything. don't allow the trust vote to happen. decide this matter. it could
have been decided on the 12th of july. then the court tells us no, no, no doesn't matter. on the 29th all that is subject. now your lordship are
telling me how can it be subject? now, your lordship are telling me rightly maybe that how can we go back on 27. but that's exactly because of the
two court orders. what do we do? but the court order was also prompted by what your speaker did. i said, you stay. don't do, don't allow them to
take view. don't have a trust vote. we said that. then on 29th june that order is passed. thereafter all, matters are placed. had your speaker, had your speaker
chosen to follow the law by giving them seven days’ notice. no my lord. the law is not nabam rebia, law is hollohon. court would have.the court would have
said alright, go and respond to that. the law is hollohon. my lords i tell your lordship now, i can't in hindsight say what the court should have done
or stayed everything, allow them to file a reply and allow after 12th of june for the speaker to decide. what is the problem? there was no problem but
the status quo changed. my lords, they were given time till 12th of july. all right, let them give time. despite the fact that it is contrary to hollohon.
forget it. they should have been given time. they should have filed a reply. the deputy speaker would have decided. why allow the status quo to be changed? and
that also because a judicial order says doesn't matter. even if the status quo is changed, we'll restore it back. so we had two judicial orders then and now
your lordship rightly your lordship rightly puts now under the proceedings of the house a new speaker, has been appointed. but then you yourself said that we will deal
with it. all that will be subjective. so essentially, we'll therefore have to invalidate the trust vote which never took place on the. it was only on the basis
of these 39. a trust vote which we will have to invalidate. a trust vote which never took place. no, no, no. even the trust vote that took place
on 4th is subjective. i'm sorry. all other actions are subject to . my learned brothers are. i'm sorry my lords, i'm sorry. mr. sibal just what. yes. on
your submission that as per the interim order dated 29 june correct, all subsequent proceedings are subject to ultimate. yes, yes. now see factually, we have to consider that.
on 29th you challenged that trust vote to be held on 30th june. yes. correct? you challenged that only. that's correct, that's correct. correct? now see the order, interim
order which is passed by this court on 29th. please read it. yes my lords, i will read it. also an order compilation my lords. let's see that. that
is.page 7 of the order compilation. orders compilation volume-1. volume-1. yes, i have it. pdf page is 7. order dated 29th june. it starts.we will just see my lords.
pdf 8 at 10, para 8. i will just read it. yes. page my lords, the writ petition is order to be listed for hearing. para 8. para 8.
having given our thoughtful consideration. that's the one? yeah. yes, yes. we do not find any ground to stay convening of the special session or the maharashtra vidhan sabha
tomorrow at 11:00 am, with the only agenda of a trust vote. the proceedings of the trust vote to be convened on 30th shall be subject to the final
outcome of the instant writ petition as well as the writ petitions referred to above. correct? yes, and the special session of the maharashtra vidhan sabha shall be conducted.
so as well as writ petitions referred to above. okay. and what? what? write petitions referred to above is that. what was the subject to ultimate the outcome? the
proceedings of the convening meeting on 30th. i agree. not all the. my lords i don't dispute that. i am saying. the fact remains that on 30th june for
whatever reason. i had resigned earlier. your lordship is right. your lordship is absolutely right. but my lords. your submission that all.as per the order dated 30th june, all
other subsequent will be. my lords, i just asked myself a simple question. had i not resigned, had i not resigned, the trust vote it would have happened and
i would have the same thing would have happened. correct. correct? the same thing happened on the 4th. <unclear> council. the same thing happened on the 4th. provided the
meeting would have been convened on 30th. my lord the same thing happened on the 4th. a trust vote was happened on the 4th. and that is also subject
to writ petition was filed. your lordship said we will consider that. that will also be subject to. no, no we were on your submission. your lordship is right.
technically. technically, what my lord is saying is absolutely right. i cannot have any two opinions or there can be no two opinions. but the fact is in substance,
it's the same thing. yes, your lordship is right. i mean, i can't get away from the fact that he said, what's the point of going to the. these
people are going to vote for him. that's exactly what happened on the 4th. that's why we challenged the 4th. that's also the writ petition is here. so my
lords, are we going into the technicality or are we going into the substance of the matter? whether these 39 could have voted in favour despite the whip. there
is a whip issued my lords on the 3rd. whip is issued on the 3rd that you vote against the trust vote. they did not. and who is the
whip? sunil prabhu, voted against the whip. so my lords, where does it take us? it doesn't take us anywhere. so he votes against the whip and my lords
gogawale is then appointed. he can't be appointed by the speaker. and gogawale - they have issued, speaker has issued notice to us. those notices can't be issued. i
can't be subject to any disqualification proceedings. and my notice has been given by the speaker to me to be disqualified. your lordship will strike it down on the
facts. so all these issues will have to be decided my lords, i am sorry. which are the issues that you want us to decide? my lords that is
exactly what i will just show. let's give it to my lords. i am sorry my lords it has taken. what your lordship might or might not choose to
decide. no, no, the crucial facts which you have told us. it is not finished yet my lords. .leading to the 22nd. yes. i think those are completed, right?
yes. those are complete. then what happens thereafter my lords another letter is.the letter of 22nd. .notices on the tenth schedule notices. that's correct, that's correct. and thereafter on
24th another notice. then on 25th. mr. sibal, we were at page 55 of that. you want me to finish that first my lords? so that, that part is
over. just for the sake of completeness, let's. indicate those dates. let's go to page 55, you were at page. i will just go back to my documents my
lords. the convenience compilation. convenience compilation 2 at. we are at 49 my lords. now this is at pdf 62, this is that document which your lordship have already
read. dated 22nd. dated 21st, but served on 22nd at 11:30, which your lordship have already read. we will just make a note of it since we have already.
that is right. i am not going to read. relevant from nabam page 62 right? except my lords the fact that they are a majority, no other cause was
shown. so 179c, i've made my job submissions on 197c already my lords. and that this connects with nabam rebia, this document. so that issue is over. then kindly
come to my lords page pdf 71. this only gives you my lords what is happening. 40 members form the mlas in assam. no dispute on any of this.
and then is the disqualification petition filed on the 25th. that is at page 72. page 62. mr. sibal, page 62 pdf that we have just touched upon, notice
to move a resolution, what does para 2 say? at page 62? yes please. para two says my lords: we all respectfully submit that you no longer have the
right to continue as deputy speaker, as you no longer enjoy the support of the majority of the house. majority of the house. more particularly the following members. majority
of the house. yes. is that what you're trying to.this is your emphasis. yes. that here also the reference is to the majority of house. and goes on to
say particularly the following members of the party. that's correct because my lords, what is party means the legislature party. my lords that is not quite correct. my learned
friend repeatedly says this. but every member of the legislative assembly and of parliament is ex-officio member of the pratinidhi sabha. they are also part of that. yes, that's
right. no doubt. hold on, hold on. hold on. no dispute. the 39 members of the legislative party are also members of the party. no dispute. no question about
it. i have not said anything contrary to that. <unclear> i have not said anything against that. only thing is that 39 members cannot hijack the party. that's all.
that we will see that's the issue. of course we welcome you. so my lords, your ladyship was right. exactly my lords. then kindly come to 59 my lords.
first, yes. 71. pdf 71, page 58. maha trouble for uddhav. hemanta meets eknath. 40 mlas in assam. photograph. sorry where are you? hindustan times article? hindustan times article.
it just shows my lords that you know the surroundings are comfortable. relevant for tenth schedule no doubt. not for a speaker, relevant. then my lords, the notices. inference.
now the notices we don't have. no more my lords, documents. all kinds of statements have been made my lords that we are forming a separate party. but be
that as it may, that all happens in assam. it's a given my lords. so let's not go into that. so this is all my lords as far as
the documentation is concerned. now let's see what the issues are. the first my lords deals with nabam rebia basically that your lordship will have to decide that does
the constitution permit an institutional hiatus by tying the hands of the speaker in functioning under the tenth schedule through proceedings initiated by a member of the legislative assembly
under 179c. that i've argued that your lordship will decide. all i can say in that regard is that if you allow that law to stay it will be
misused. it will be a new model of toppling governments. safety valve for the defectors. now my lords, second, what are the consequences in law when members, whether in
minority or majority of the legislature party in the house act dehors the political party and our contrary to the directions of the political party and assert their separate
identity by forming a separate group within the legislature party in the legislature. squarely my lords that is an issue. squarely. that can in any legislature x number of
people form a separate identity and say we will not listen to the party. we will decide what to. that you have been arguing. then will a group. next
third, will a group within the legislature party asserting their separate identity and acting dehors, the political party, or contrary to its directions, have per se, incurred disqualification under
para 2 of the tenth schedule? there is no evidence to be led here. admittedly there is a whip, sunil prabhu on the 3rd saying vote against the trust
vote. admittedly on the record of the house they voted in favour of the trust vote. even by that time, gogawale would not been appointed by the speaker. though
speaker had no right to appoint gogawale. he appointed gogawale on the 3rd evening which he can't do otherwise, but that's another matter. so my lords, what is there
for the speaker to decide? there's a violation, the vote is on the record. you are not usurping anything. you are only declaring. this question is inchoate. this issue
is inchoate. what is the logical follow-up? speaker will say it is per se case. i am sorry? speaker will say it's a per se case. i hope so.
so you are. i hope so my lords, i hope so. it is a different matter. what you're trying to say in 3 is in per se cases should
the court not decide. yes. that's the point. so that's why i put per se there my lords, only for that reason. got that. it is inchoate. we have
to ultimately persuade you my lords, so we have to. i always say, without the court on your side, there's no point arguing. and the only way to have
the court on your side is to be as reasonable as possible. though politics is essentially unreasonable. the art of politics is to do the make the unreasonable look
reasonable. necessary. politics can be very reasonable also. three: will a group within the legislature party asserting their separate identity and acting dehors the political party or contrary to
its directions, have per se, incurred disqualification under paragraph 2? then four, can a group within the legislature party asserting their separate identity and acting dehors, the political party,
or contrary to its directions, have the constitutional authority to alter the leadership of the political party in the house or the whip appointed by the political party of
the house. directly in issue. because of those documents, that i've shown to your lordship already, that you are removed from assam, you are removed as a chief whip
and i continue to be the party and you are removed as leader. i continue to be the group leader. five, given that an elected government should be allowed
to serve its full term, this is now a constitutional premise my lords on the basis of which i made this proposition. given that an elected government should be
allowed to serve its full term, as a matter of constitutional law, can a group within the legislative party asserting a separate identity dislodge an elected government while proceedings
for disqualification under the tenth schedule appending that is, before the speaker decides on the issue of disqualification. directly an issue. but what you are doing in this process
is side-tracking the disqualification proceedings, toppling a government and then saying, now my speaker will decide. actually the constitutional premise, and every constitutional authority should in fact help in
ensuring that an elected government continues to be in power. my lords, that is something that i am going to argue later, but i want to just tell your
lordship something very interesting. the governor is to decide to administer the oath of office. so, 30 people go to him. 20 people go to him. the governor must
first know which party they belong to. either it is post-poll alliance, or pre-poll alliance. right? so the governor must first ask them, which is that party? now my
lords, their position, 39 members position is inchoate. they can't represent the shiv sena. this is the first time this issue has arisen in this country. so my lords,
how does the governor decide that i'll administer oath of office? there is no party before him. just touching it. this is an issue that your lordship will have
to consider. so my lords let's come to six. should the governor, who is constitutionally obliged to sustain the continuity of an elected government, change the status quo by
allowing for a change in government before disqualification proceeding that decided by the speaker. then next, whether the governor can swear in as chief minister, a person against whom
a notice for disqualification has been issued by the speaker acting as a tribunal under the tenth schedule and is pending adjudication? what is the impact of pending disqualification
petitions on the ability of members to participate in a test of strength on the floor of the house when their vote would have the effect of toppling of
government? i can understand in a situation, that it clearly doesn't matter. the outcome would be the same. but here the hard facts are, their vote topples the government.
so you have allegedly according to me, a member who should be disqualified, voting to topple an elected government without the governor asking him which party you belong to,
without the governor even finding out for himself or the governor saying, look, there is some disqualification petitions, by this an elected government to be toppled. let's stay our
hands. we will not administer oath of office till this disqualification is decided. he can say that. should he say that? should he not say that? that's my lords,
some in area where your lordship have never looked at, so to say. obviously it's premised on constitutional morality. then my lords, can a constitutional court in a matter
relating to disqualification of the tenth schedule decides the matter on its own without referring the matter to the speaker for decision and if so, under what circumstances? right?
directly what my lord put to me. and we are aware of it. if the decision of the speaker that a member has incurred disqualification under the tenth schedule
relates back to the date of the action complained of, then what is the status of proceedings that took place during the pendency of a disqualification petition? because it
relates back? he is the chief minister. what do we do? which is why time is of the essence. what is the impact of removal of para 3 of
the tenth schedule? i've already argued that. in what circumstances do the speaker recognize the whip and the leader of the political party? i'm arguing that. what is the
scope of powers of the commission with respect to determination of a split, that is something i'll argue later. this is my lords, according to me, the issues that
your lordship might wish to look into. now my lords kindly have a look at my overview document which is document for the.our submissions, the petitioners submissions. a. a,
my lords correct and kindly have a look at outlines and over pdf page 5. overview. your lordship may skip that. i want your lordship straight away to take
you to the issue of the whip. chapter 7 yes, yes. of whips and the role of political parties. this is that pdf page 70. which file? of
the written submissions of petitioner. same document. written submissions a, my lords, of the petitioner. page 70. i hope to finish today, my lords so that i don't
take too much of your lordship's time. did you say it's pdf page? page 70. 70. chapter 7 - what is the scope and power of the speaker
to determine the whip and the leader of the house? what is the interplay of the same with respect to the provisions of the tenth schedule? 'the petitioner
respectfully submits that the leadership of the original political party is exclusively empowered to determine which member of the house shall be the whip, and also the leader.
petitioner respectfully submit that the leadership of the original political party is exclusively empowered to determine which member of the house shall be the whip and also the
leader of the house legislature party the speaker is bound to recognize the person who are communicated by the leadership of the original political party to be its
whip and leader of the house legislature party. the speaker's role in this regard is really administrative in nature the speaker cannot abuse his role to defeat the
spirit and intent behind the provisions of the tenth schedule. now, it is submitted that the respondents case is hinged on illegal misconception that the whip under paragraph
2(1)(b) of the tenth schedule, can be issued, changed by a majority of the members of the legislative party, which is what they did on the 22nd june.
the defence is in the teeth of the plain reading of 2(1)(b), which my lord has already read.
that's exactly what we were wanting to do.
a bear reading of the aforesaid provision, which shows as the framers of the tenth schedule were conscious that the disqualification
was to be incurred for violation of the whip issued by the political party or any person or authority authorized by
the political party, there is no reference at all to the legislature party in para 2(1)(b) of the tenth schedule .
this distinction between political party and legislative party is also born out from a reading of paragraph 1(b), and 1(c) of
the tenth schedule, which brings out the difference between the meaning ascribed to the legislator party and the original political party.
the respondents in defence have sought to intermingle the definition of political party with that of the legislature party
and have sought to extrapolate the legislature party in place, in the place of a political party into 1(b).
it is further submitted that para 1 of the tenth schedule makes a clear distinction between the term legislature party and original political party.
the term legislature party is defined as the group consisting of all the members of that house for the time being belonging to that political party.
and the term original political party is precisely defined as the political party to which a member belongs.
further, the definition makes it clear that the said term is specifically defined for the purposes of two one of the tenth schedule in this regard.
my lords kuldeep nayar's case. kindly have a look at a paragraph 4.
i, just a quote there.
'authorities are certainly not one thing which indicates that court should interpret in a broad and generous spirit, the document which
contains the fundamental law of the land or the basic principles of government. nevertheless, the rule of plain meaning or literal
interpretation described in maxwell's interpretation of statues, as the primary rule, could not be altogether abandoned today in interpreting any document.
indeed, we find lord evershed, the length and detail of modern legislation is undoubtedly reinforced the claim of literal construction as the only safe rule.
it may be that the great mass of modern legislation, a large part of which consists of statutory rules,
make some departure from the literal rule of interpretation more easily justifiable today than it was in the past.
my lords the next is very important.
but the object of interpretation and of construction, which may be broader than interpretation, is to discover the intention of the lawmakers in every case.
c), crawford. the object can obviously be best achieved by first looking at the language and used in the relevant provisions.
other methods of extracting the meaning can be resorted to only if the language used is contradictory, ambiguous, or leads really to absurd results.
this is an elementary and basic rule of interpretation, as well as of construction processes which from the point of view
of principles applied, coalesce and converge towards the common purpose of both, which is to get at the real sense and meaning.
so far as it may be reasonably possible to do this or what is found there laid down, the
provisions whose meaning is under consideration are therefore to be examined before applying any method of construction at all.
and 2(1)(a) and 2(1)(b) makes it very clear.
violation of the whip and giving up, voluntarily giving up membership.
and your lordship with experience knows what act amounts to voluntarily giving up membership.
we endorse and reiterate the view taken in the above quoted paragraph is a judgment.
it may be desirable to give a broad and generous construction to the constitutional provisions but while doing so, i'll just read
this, to the rule of plain meaning or literal interpretation, which remains the primary rule, as also to be kept in mind.
in fact, the rule of literal construction is the safe rule unless language used is contradictory, ambiguous, or leads really to absurd results.
i'll continue after lunch.
<< lunch break >> mr. maninder singh you are not the only personal who is feeling hot in the court. we agree with you. we have
to start the acs. yes, my lords. mr. maninder singh, is it the heat of the weather or the heat of mr. kapil sibal's arguments? both
together. only light. this is the generosity of the bar, my lords. we'll start the acs. my lords. i was reading pdf-72 and i was at
the end of the paragraph. i am reading now para 174. 174? yeah 174, at pdf page 72. yes. it is submitted that parliament in its
wisdom, had used the term political party under the provisions of 2(1)(b), wherein a member attracts the disqualification for going against the wishes or directions of its political party.
the respondents in substance are asking this honourable court to read the term political party
as legislature party which has a completely different meaning altogether, as pointed out here and above.
in this regard it is well settled that when the language of a statute is amply clear and also the
words used are self explanatory, the court ought not to read any other interpretation to the language or the statute.
it is further submitted that the question whether the term political party under the provisions of 2(1)(b) of
the tenth schedule, refers to the legislative party was considered by justice srinivasan in a separate opinion in mayawati.
now my lords kindly have a look at that, para 17.
the argument of the appellant is the expression political party in subparagraph (b), means political party in the house.
in other words, the legislature party. this argument runs counter to the definition contained in 1(c).
your lordship will notice that 1(c) says 'original political party.' 2(1)(a) and 2(1)(b), makes no distinction.
so the political party relates back to 1(c).
therefore, it's the original political party so therefore it cannot be the legislative party.
that's what my lords held.
according to that definition, original political party in relation to a member of a house means
the political party to which he belongs for the purposes of subparagraph 1 of para 2.
the expression original political party is used in para 3 only.
para 2, does not at all use the expression original political party.
the said expression in para 3, is equated to the expression political party in para 2(1).
the definition clause in para 1(c), does not make any distinction between sub-para (a) and
sub-para (b) of part 2, but the appellant's counsel wants us to make such a distinction.
according to him, political party in sub-para (a) would refer to the original political party.
but the same expression in sub-para (b) would refer only to the legislature party.
the term legislature party, having been defined in 1(b), which would well have been used into 1(b).
instead, the term political party of the intention of parliament was to refer only to the legislative party.
there is another feature in 3(b), which negatives the appellant's argument.
according to 3(b) from the time of the split in the original political party, such as the one referred to in the
first part of the para, the faction referred to therein shall be deemed to be the political party to which a member
concerned belongs for the purposes of subparagraph 1 of para 2, and to be his original political party for the purposes of para 3.
the entire sub-para 1 of para 2 is referred to therein, meaning thereby both clauses a and b of sub-para 1, and no distinction is made between the two clauses.
hence, for the purposes of clause a as well as clause b, the faction referred to in the first part of para 3 shall be
deemed to be the political party mentioned in sub-para, and the same faction shall be deemed to be the original political party mentioned in para 3.
it is thus clear that political party in clause b of sub-para 1 of part 2 is none other than the original political party mentioned in 3.
the argument that the context in para 2(1)(b) requires to equate political party with legislature party, even though the definition clause runs differently, is not acceptable.
a reading of sub para b and the explanation of 2(1) places the matter beyond doubt whether a
political party in sub-para b refers to the original political party only and not to the legislature party.
according to the explanations for the purpose of the entire sub-para, an elected member of the house shall be deemed to
belong to the political party, if any, by which he was set up as a candidate for election as such member.
certainly the legislature party could not have set up the member concerned as a candidate for election.
according to the learned counsel for the appellant, the legislature party may have to take decisions now.
this is of the argument.
may have to take decisions on urgent matters in the house and as it represents the original political party in the house,
whatever direction is issued by the leader of such legislature party must be regarded as a direction issued by the political party.
there is no merit in this context.
when the provision in the constitution has taken care to make a distinction between the legislature party and the original political party and
prescribed that the direction should be one issued by the political party or any person or authority authorized in this behalf, there is
no meaning in saying that whatever the leader of the legislature party directs must be regarded as that of the original political party.
it squarely answers my lords the argument.
their argument is we are 38. we are therefore the political party.
so 38 people my lords in the legislative assembly as members can't be the political party.
we are the legislative party. members of the legislative party.
the reason is not far to seek.
disqualification of a member elected by the people is a very serious action.
and before that extreme step is taken, it should be proved that he acted contrary
to the direction issued by the party which set him up as a candidate for election.
then they go to hollohon, we don't have to go there.
we've already. now i'll come to 176.
okay my lords, my learned colleague, my lords, points out just one part.
middle of that paragraph, my lords. i am just seeing that.
yes.
it says my lords 'the said object would be achieved with the disqualification incurred on the ground of voting or abstaining from voting by a member
is confined to cases by the change of government is likely to be brought about or is prevented as the case may be as a result
of such voting or abstinence, or where such voting or absence is a matter which was a major policy and program on which the political party
to which the member belongs went to the polls. for this purpose direction given by the political party to a member belonging to it, the violation
of which may entail disqualification thereto would have to be limited to a vote on a motion of confidence and no-confidence in the government, or where
the motion under consideration relates to a matter which was an integral policy and program of the political party, on the basis of which it approached the law'.
now my lords kindly come to 176.
'it is humbly submitted that the interpretation sought by the respondents is accepted. if the interpretation sought by is suspected the same would result in a far
reaching consequences and would destabilize the framework of the party system by taking away the powers assigned to a political party to prevent defections within. the reading,
this reading would negate the meaning ascribed to 2(1)(b) of the tenth schedule, as well as defeat the entire purpose of insertion of the tenth schedule to
curb the menace of defection. the entire edifice of our parliamentary democracy is based on a party system. a candidate is chosen by the elected or the
symbol of the political party. the legislature of the legislature party is only a product of the political party. my lords, the chief justice has just articulated
that earlier. the legislature party is the species and the political party is the genus. there is an umbilical cord which links the political party and the
legislature party. the actions of that umbilical cord cannot be out of line with the objective of political party. in kyoto, this court said the following, my
lords this is important. but a political party functions on the strength of shared beliefs. its own political stability and social utility depends on such shared beliefs
and concerted action of its members in furtherance of those commonly held principles. any freedom of its members to vote as they please, independent of the political
parties declared policies will not only embarrass it's public image and popularity, but also undermine public confidence in it, which, in the ultimate analysis, is the source of such sustenance.
nay, indeed it is, in its very survival.
intra-party debates are, of course, a different thing.
but a public image of disparate stance by members of the same political party is not looked upon in political tradition as a desirable state of things.
loyalty to party is a norm being based on shared beliefs.
a divided party is looked on with suspicion by the electorate.
it is natural for members to accept the opinion of their leaders and spokesman on the wide variety of matters on which those members have no specialist knowledge.
generally, members will accept majority decisions in the party even when they disagree.
it is understandable, therefore, that a member who rejects the party whip, even on a single occasion, will attract attention and more criticism than sympathy.
to abstain from voting when required by party to vote is to suggest a degree of unreliability.
to vote against party is disloyalty. to join with others in abstention of voting with the other side smacks of conspiracy.
that's exactly what happened here and it started on the 21st of june.
clause b of para 2(1) of the tenth schedule gives effect to the principle and sentiment
by imposing a disqualification on a member who votes or abstains from voting contrary to any directions.
the provisions, however, recognized two exceptions. one, when the member abstains from the political party, prior permission to vote or abstain from voting.
and the other when the member is voted without obtaining such permission but his action has been condoned by the political party.
this provision itself accommodates the possibility that there may be occasions when a member may vote or abstain from voting contrary to the directions of the party he belongs.
this in itself, again, may provide a clue to the proper understanding and construction of the expression, any direction in
clause b of paragraph 2(1), whether really all directions or whips from the party entail the statutory consequences on whether
having regard to the extraordinary nature and sweep of the power, very serious consequences that flow, including the extreme penalty of disqualification.
the expression should be given a meaning confining it's operation to the context indicated by the objects and purposes of the tenth schedule.
we shall deal with this aspect separately.
it is thus submitted that it is the political party which appoints the chief whip and not the legislative party.
the political party is headed by the leadership, and this factom of leadership is not in dispute.
organizational elections in shiv sena were held on 27-02-2018.
my lords that's a wrong date. it actually is 23rd january 2018.
and the leadership structure of the party was intimated to eci, wherein it is clearly stated, that uddhav thackeray is the paksh pramukh.
it may not be out of place that under the maharashtra legislative members removal of disqualification rule.
which i have already read. that you have already shown.
so, my lords, i'll skip that.
it is clear that the whips are the directions issued by the political party and not the
members of the legislative party or the leaders of the legislative party or the leaders of the legislature.
then erskine may says, whip serves as an intermediate between the leaders and parliamentary membership of their parties in
order to keep each informed of the views of the other, which is what i was mentioning to your lordship.
the phrase adopted by burke caught public fancy and soon became popular.
then, my lords kindly come to 183, skip the 5-6 lines on top and the sentence on the right side.
the keep. 'they keep members supplied with information.
' they were talking about whips. your lordship has that?
'they keep members supplied with information about the business of the house.' my lords, what happens traditionally is my lords, the members do
not know the business of the house because the business of the house is decided by what is called the business advisory committee.
and only some members of the house of political parties are members of that committee.
so every week couple of times we can probably.
my lords every week a meeting takes place as to what should be the business for the next week.
so my lords that's decided? and then it is announced in the house.
on that basis, the whip then informs the members of the house that this is going to be the business.
these are the bills that are to be, that are to be debated.
this is the position that we have to take on the bills.
therefore, you please prepare your speeches in the context of the position of the party.
that's the job of the bill. now my lords, now that is not the job of somebody who says, i am a group leader and i will decide.
that is why the whip is appointed by the political party, for that very reason.
on general parliamentary business, how specific are the whips?
i mean, this is not. unrelated to this case.
my lords a whatsapp message is sent to us.
three lines at the end underlining otherwise you have to be present otherwise action will be taken.
and you come and vote. and this is how you have to vote.
<unclear> and whip will come. vote for this bill. vote against this resolution. so each one on our whatsapp, that message is sent. so we have to be present.
they are very generous because while we argue our cases, proceedings are going on. so we are not present. so they don't trouble us too much. exception of ninth
schedule. that holds for mr. jethmalani also, right? my personal opinion is this is my personal. i don't want to say it the fact of the matter is if
you want to practice, you should practice. you want to be in parliament, devote your time to parliament. that should be. otherwise my lords we can only perform one
function. we can't perform both. anyway, that's another matter. it's not that. it's not that. it's what happens is that the key issues of the party are nowadays before
the court. they want us to be here and slowly, mr. jethmalani will realize as the burden increases, that he might also have to do that. just one second,
aside about coming out of the hall of parliament, a very leading left leader mentioned inside the house that lawyers, chartered accountants, doctor and other similar people should not
be in parliament. they should concentrate on their profession. mr. jaitley and i were talking in the lobby . so when he came out, a good friend of mine.
he told him that you want parliament only to consist of unemployed and unemployable persons. don't say that, don't say that publicly. this is what happened with. i am
taking his example. he said it for a large class of profession, not lawyers alone. so my lords there is a certain amount of input you bring in if
you are otherwise also gainfully employed. that's true. but lawyers in many jurisdictions are not allowed my lords to do both things. that's also true. 'they keep members supplied
with information about the business of the house and enforce party discipline, being constantly in touch with the members and the lobbies of the house, the whips acting as
intermediaries between the leaders and the rank and file of their parties keep the former in touch with the currents of opinion not only within their own party and
thereby nip the incipient revolt in the bud, but also to some extent with other movements of opinion inside the house. and it is through the whips that members
of a party come to know about their leaders' views and the plans into which the leader thinks it is necessary or experience to initiate them. the whips are
the active agents within the parties, a channel of communication, whereby one party negotiates with another concerning topics of debate or conduct of business in the house'. in the
handbook of the working of the ministry of parliamentary affairs, the background of origin of whips is noted in this regard. it is stated that 'whips who are drawn
from various political parties are vital links in the internal organization of parties inside the legislature'. the expression whips is derived from the.my lords we don't have to go
into that. then come as the house of commons library, that also my lords goes to edmund burke. we've already read that. let's not waste our time on it.
then my lords, kindly see further para 186. further is elucidating the duties of the whip it is stated as follows. the primary role of the chief whip is
to get the government's business through parliament and in particular, to secure the government's majority in votes on its legislative and policy programs. the duties of the whip include
keeping mps and peers informed of forthcoming parliamentary business, as i told your lordship, maintaining the party's voting strength by ensuring members attend important debates and support their party
in parliamentary divisions and passing on to the party leadership, the opinions of back-bench members. the note also relies upon roger and walter, let's leave that. kindly come to
law commission. this is very important. para 188. the law commission, recognized the importance of the whip necessarily by abiding for the, by the whip, for abiding by the
whip and observed in para 3.4.4, is as follows. necessary for abiding by whip, the necessity for abiding by the whip -- 'in such a case the endeavour should
be to strengthen the political parties by providing for internal democracy and internal structures rather than to weaken them. in as much as we are recommending in this report
insertion of a new chapter, governing the political parties, the political parties including the provisions ensuring internal democracy, internal structures and transparency in the conduct of affairs. there should
be no objection to strengthening of the political parties so that they will. the will of the majority, the will of the majority prevails in their political party. freedom
of speech is undoubtedly precious. but when a person becomes a member of the political party, accepts it's ticket and fights and succeeds on that ticket, he renders himself,
subject to the discipline and control of the party. it should also be noticed that when a person applies for the ticket of a political party, he knows and
is expected to know about the leadership, internal working, policies and programs of the party. he must also reckon with the fact that in future the leadership may change,
policies and programs may change, and so on. if he with his eyes open, applies for and obtains the ticket and contests and wins on that basis, he cannot
plead later that he does not agree with the leadership or policies of the party. this is all this argument, my lords, that was made. freedom of expression. we
have a right. we feel that your policies are wrong. you have deviated from ideology. you knew the ideology, you knew that he is the paksh pramukh. you knew
what he stands for, you took his ticket, you were a minister, you never raised your voice. and suddenly in assam, you go to say that, no, no, we
are very, very concerned about it. prior to 2000.before 21st june, where is the single statement that is on the record of this case? not a single statement. that
is because you got lured into it. that you thought that maybe by using your majority in the legislature, you could actually topple the government and become the chief
minister. so then it says my lords, any difference of opinion must be first ventilate and fight within the party. kindly see that. your lordship asked me that question.
and what does he do? he has to ventilate it within the party. call a meeting. then my lords more important, the membership of the house does not become
his private property, nor can he trade in it. how patient these words are. that is not his private property nor can he trade in it. i mean, i
am sure my lords, he wasn't in assam for cleansing his conscience. either there were bigger issues that were to be dealt with in assam. somewhat akin to some
ground issues. anyway, it is a trust that he is in the members of.in the members of a trustee. he cannot also say that he will take advantage of
the same, of the name and facilities of a political party, fight the election of the ticket of that party, and succeed, but he will not subject to the
discipline of the political party. this is simply unthinkable besides being unethical and immoral. he has to abide by the party discipline within the house. he might fight within
the party to have his point of view or policies adopted by the party. but once the party takes a decision one way or the other and issues the
whip, he shall have to abide by it or resign and go out.' this, in essence, tells you, my lords, what the contours of the conduct of a member
of the legislature in the house should be and in what circumstances? and there are only two that he can actually disobey the whip. one, we can take the
permission of the leader, and two, he says something contrary to the whip and the party condones it. and this law commission report led to the 91st constitutional amendment
deleting paragraph 3. so in practice, the connection between the political party and its elected legislators is maintained by the office of the chief whip, who, in his essence,
is the representative of the political party amongst legislators. then perumal versus that my lords. just kindly have a look at the paragraph 12, but i won't read the
whole thing, the paragraph starting. second paragraph. 'the whips have to know their men.' your lordship has that paragraph? 'the whips have to know their men. this involves a
close contact with all members and knowledge of their interests, special aptitudes, qualities and potentialities. whips take these aspects into account while sending list of speakers to the chair
in the interest of quality of debate and deliberations. they keep members.' - now my lords i cannot go to the speaker. no member of the legislature can go
to the speaker in parliament or rajya sabha or lok sabha that i want to speak. he has no choice in the matter. the party will decide who to,
who is the party my lords? it's the leader. that on this issue on cooperative societies, my member in the legislature knows more about cooperative societies than somebody else.
therefore, allow him to lead the debate. in finance, who leads the debate in rajya sabha? mr. chidambaram. who decides that? the party. so my lords, each person has
his expertise on education, on telecom. every different people in the house who will be espousing the cause of that subject matter because he has expertise and who decides
that? not even the leader. leader will put up the name to the party president or the upa chairperson of the party. and then they will say, okay, now
you let him decide. let him debate. so this whole argument and sitting in assam, i can throw you out and i can throw the whip out and i
can change the leader of the house and i'll proclaim myself as the leader of the house. what is the speaker going to do when you send it back
to the speaker? and this realization dawned two years afterwards my lords, when he was, he was a minister and all that. 'so being constantly in touch with the
members of lobbies of the house, the whips acting as intermediaries between the leaders and the rank and file of their parties. keep the former in touch with the
current opinion, not only within their own party and thereby nip the incipient revolt in the bud, but also to some extent with other movements of opinion. and it
is through the whips that members of a party come to know about their leaders views and the plans into which the leader thinks it necessary, experience initiate them.
the whips are the active agents within the parties, a channel of communication whereby one party negotiates.' and i'll leave that out. then, my lords, kindly come to the
next paragraph para 13. 'the chief whip is the eyes and ears of the leader of the party.' so far as the members are concerned. 'he conveys the wishes
of the leader to the members of the party and keeps the leader informed of the current opinion in the party and also the moods and inclinations of individual
members when these deserve special notices. during sessions in his capacity as advisor to the leader, he normally meets the prime minister, not only on one set interview daily
but also several times in the course of the date for brief consultations.' why my lords, what happens is there is hungama in the house. there are not. people
are going go to the well, you immediately have a meeting with the leader. what should we do? because the house is adjourned for 15 minutes, 20 minutes, half
an hour. you go back to the leader, you have a quiet meeting my lords, the whip will have a quiet meeting, a decision will be taken, conveyed to
the legislature. so to say that i am a 40 members of the legislative party, i can do what i like, i am a separate group, i'm a separate
entity, i could remove you. it's unthinkable in parliamentary democracy. unthinkable. and this per se, that's why i used the expression per se . he has voluntarily given up
his membership of the party, per se . apart from making the house and keeping essentials for transactions of business, the chief whip has the whip hand in shaping
the core tone and tenor of debate on special occasions for he selects the speakers from his party and hands over list to the speaker for facilitating the process
of catching his eyes. the responsibility of keeping everybody at his post and keeping his party united, strong and well-knit falls on him. he selects members for the select
committees and other parliamentary and government assignments, keeping in view the background experience, the aptitude qualifications of members of his party. this gives him.supposing my lords, a select committee
is to be formed and the person to be nominated. who decides that? if 40 members of the house will say no, no. because we are 40, we nominate
this person. no. the whip will tell the speaker that this is our nominee on the select committee or this joint committee or the standing committee. so this gives
him wide power, power of patronage which comes handy and keeping with party members amenable to his influence. it is thus clear from
a reading of the aforesaid that the whip forms an important link and umbilical cord between the political party and the legislators. the
whip enforces the directions of the political party. then my lords, there is a discussion about how the term political party as my
lords actually was not there in the constitution earlier or not constitution even otherwise, was not there in a statute. then 29(a), of the representation.
i don't have to go through the representation.
we are short of time and i don't want to take time unnecessarily.
my learned friend can, if he wishes to deal with some of this.
then my lords, kindly come to.there is a judgment of this court in 2018, volume-9, scc.
(2018) 9 scc page 100. this is sailesh manubhai parmar versus election commission of india.
my lords, in this case, they wanted to introduce nota option in the rajya sabha elections, for elections to the rajya sabha.
in that context at page 116, the judgement starts at 100.
i will just read one paragraph, paragraph 19, at page 116.
page 116, paragraph 19? yes we all are here.
yes, my lords, i'll just read it.
the aforesaid passages throw immense light on the distinction between direct and indirect elections, and especially on the concept of indirect election which encompasses proportional representation.
there is voting by open ballot, and it has been so introduced to sustain the foundational values
of party discipline and to avoid any kind of cross voting, thereby ensuring purity in the election process.
they have been treated as core values of democracy and fair election.
it is worth to note that in a voting for members of the council of states, the nature of voting by an elector is a grave concern.
it is because in such an election, there is a party whip and the elector is bound to obey the command of the party.
the party discipline in this kind of election is of extreme significance, for that is the fulcrum of the existence of political parties.
it is essential in a parliamentary democracy.
the thought of cross voting and corruption is obnoxious in such a voting.
in this context we may refer with profit to the.
then para 22 at page 118. 23 actually.
23 at page 118. if i may read my lord?
'in a democracy the purity of election is categorically imperative. the democratic body politics, as has been held in manoj narula stipulates that the quintessential
idea of democracy is abhorrent to corruption and laws, emphasis on prevalence of genuine orderliness, positive propriety, dedicated discipline, and sanguine sanctity by constant affirmance
of constitutional morality which is a pillar stone of good governance. the purity of democracy does not withstand anything that has the potential to create
an incurable chasm in the backbone of a democratic setup. the law is meant to eradicate the same. when one analyses the exercise of choice
nota in the voting process of the council of states where open ballot is permissible and secrecy of voting has no room and further, where
this discipline of the political party/parties matters, it is clear that that such choice will have a negative impact.' that's all my lords that i wish to state.
now my lords coming back to. so i skip that and i come my lords now to.
i have dealt with the facts now my lords and i don't want to take too much time now.
then my lords, now i come to the governor's decision.
chapter 9? yes my lords, chapter 9.
i'm not going to intra-party decisions my lords.
i'll just save time. come to chapter 9.
now my lords, this is, as i said, an issue that has arisen for the first time.
a member of the bjp, along with.
where does chapter 9 begin? at page 100?
my lords sorry. page 100. i'm sorry.
my lords 235, 'it is respectfully submitted that the exercise. is it the 28th june decision of the governor ? sorry. 28th june, decision of the
governor. decision of the governor which. to invite shinde my lords. 28th of june. 30th. 30th? 30th. 28th is our trust vote. we do not go
to the trust vote. 30th. 30th my lords he is sworn in. now your lordship knows that under the constitution there are areas where the governor
has discretionary power, subject to three exceptions, which are given in nabam rebia which is in. this is an area when in the beginning my lords,
there is an election that takes place. who is to form the government? there is enough discretion with the governor. he will see as whether there's a pre-poll alliance.
and if the pre-poll alliance has majority, he'll call the leader.
normally. i mean, there are exceptions. there's a post.
if he doesn't get a pre-poll alliance majority, he'll call a post-poll alliance and if not, my lords, he will otherwise see if
the majority can be cobbled up by a leader who has the confidence of the house, who may have the confidence of the house.
that discretion is always with him my lords.
now we are talking of the discretion of a governor, post the formation of a government.
that's the first issue. so post the formation of an elected government if ten people go to the governor, what is his discretion in the matter?
because the governor has to ascertain - one, that look these people along with others,
the leadership that i will administer the oath to will have the confidence of the house.
that's one criteria on the basis of which he will swear him in.
two my lords, he will ask the question, which party do you belong to?
he has naturally have to ask. i am sure he will know that before even he asks that question.
so he knows my lords, that the shiv sena is not before him.
on the 30th he knows shiv sena is not before him.
so what is his discretion in administering the oath of office to eknath shinde?
except the fact that all the 39 rebels will support or the bjp along with the 39 rebels, will oust the government and will support the new chief minister.
he also knows that there is a disqualification petition pending.
so your lordships will have to decide for the first time in situations of this nature, when there is an already an elected government in place
and there is a taint, alleged taint of a certain set of members pursuant to the fact that disqualification proceedings are pending, whether the governor can
exercise discretion in a manner which will topple an elected government, not await the outcome of the disqualification proceedings, the governor could have done two things.
could have said, i know for a fact that there is a disqualification notice against you all or against 16 of you.
you who claim, want me to administer an oath of office to want to be the chief minister.
the court has given you time till the 12th of july, please first file your reply on the 12th of july, see the outcome of those proceedings.
and if there is no taint as far as your membership is concerned, i will administer the oath of office to you.
that i think is a constitutionally moral path that the governor ought to have adopted.
my lords, institutional morality demands that he follows that path.
the constitution in fact, persuades him to follow that path.
why? because there is an elected government in place of which he was a member.
he himself. eknath shinde was a member.
so why would a governor my lords administer an oath except that he himself knows that the elected government will be toppled?
that's a very serious matter according to me my lords.
you looked at the sarkaria commission report my lords, your lordship will find no such eventuality my lords consider to it.
the governor which. eventualities are to be considered on experience.
that's true, that's true. my lords ultimately democracy only thrives when institutions uphold the sanctity of the constitution.
correct. and quite frankly my lords, and this is again my personal opinion, no court, no institution should balk from that.
should withhold it's hands from that. because ultimately it's the message sent by court, by institutions, that we are above the vicissitudes of fortune that come with politics.
that is the only way to gain respect within the public and to uphold the values for which our forefathers gave us this republic.
but unfortunately, that's not to be. so my lords here there is a big conundrum.
very big conundrum. so, first the 27th order, the 29th order, then the governor.
even the governor could have stopped it.
even he chose not to stop it.
so your lordship will have to evolve some principle in the context of it because this, if nabam is not overruled this will happen time and again.
and the governor will play. i'm sorry to say my lords.
i have seen the governor, we did.
it happened in arunachal. and we have seen my lords, and i mean no disrespect to the institution of the governor.
we have seen governors performing a more proactive role as institutional heads within the state which has created disturbances within the polity.
so therefore, how your lordship will evolve a principle to ensure that constitutional morality is upheld, is something that i leave it to your lordships.
i cannot give an answer.
i can only say in the facts and circumstances of this case, the governor should not have
administered the oath of office to eknath shinde, because he was not the leader of the shiv sena.
there was a pending disqualification petition against him.
he did not. he belonged to the shiv sena, but had dissociated himself with the shiv sena.
and he had no locus who was to go to the.
supposing, whether the shiv sena form a government with the bjp, who was to go to the governor?
the leader of the shiv sena. that's the paksh pramukh, uddhav thackeray.
it is he, who would represent the shiv sena before the governor and say, okay, we want to join hands with the bjp.
in what capacity was eknath shinde before the governor?
in which capacity? and in which capacity did the governor accept or give him audience and administer the oath of office?
and my lords, kindly see shinde has never disputed that because he is the.
he is in the. he says, i am shiv sena and he has never disputed that uddhav thackeray is the paksh pramukh.
he has not disputed it even today.
so in what capacity did he go to the governor?
where did he get authority from? not from uddhav thackeray, not from the paksh pramukh.
in fact, my lords what the governor does in this process, it revives the concept of a
split and allows it to be alive before him, even though para 3 has been deleted from the.
gives it legitimacy. now all this is a violation of 2(1)(a).
all this per se my lords. what is the speaker to decide?
from the 21st june right up to 30th june, when he is sworn in, each act amounts to voluntarily giving up membership of the party.
each act. and under the tenth schedule, he has no defence because there is no amalgamation.
may i, my lords, your lordships my lords the chief justice asked me a very pertinent question, my lords, as to what a person should do if he's unhappy.
actually the answer lies in a judgment of the election commission, brahmanand reddy, which was came up in slp to supreme court.
slp was dismissed. i will just give it to my lords.
that is the judgment of which court?
that's the judgment of? the election commission.
election commission. yes. just give it to my lord please.
my lords, when you proclaim that you continue to be member of the shiv sena you also proclaim that you are working under the constitution of the shiv sena.
naturally, my lords, you must assume that.
and the constitution of the shiv sena allows you to voice your opinion in the form of a dissent or otherwise.
and to get support from primary members of the party or from the pratinidhi sabha as well as the karyakarini, so that you can actually articulate your concerns.
and so it is in this context my lords this order was passed by the election commission, and this judgment, my lords, i want my lords' attention to paragraph.
my lords had a couple of questions for me. there's two things.
lots of the submissions i don't know whether they will join issues with you.
straightforward from the interpretation of the constitution and the provision.
two aspects. one relating to the leadership issue which is staring in the face of the speaker at least.
that is one aspect of the matter.
how does one deal with it? other is?
that is what is staring in the face of the speaker.
leadership issue. particularly in the context of the legislators.
correct. now another aspect i want your exposition on that is that legislators double up as the political leaders in every district.
they are the same legislator. here he is a legislator.
in a district he is a leader.
and normally, we all know that in the district, the legislators are the top leaders invariably.
an mla in a district is not.
so therefore, he wears the hat of the political leader and he comes into the legislative assembly and he is a legislator there.
so therefore he in a way represents the political perspective also while he is performing the function of a legislator.
sure, sure. so therefore, the question arises as to how, whether.
where is. there is some kind of an overlap with respect to the position of a legislator as a person representing the political part of the political party.
at what stage and what is the test to determine it?
sadiq ali is in a different context.
but of course, substantially what you have told us that batting order or for the speaker is first to determine the tenth schedule issue.
but in the context of these two factors, i just wanted your.
my lords what happens is, i'll tell your lordship.
i represent a particular assembly constituency in a state.
the nature of that constituency may be entirely different from the nature of another constituency, a 100 miles away.
the nature of issues may be entirely different my lords.
as your lordship knows, my lords, the spread of the other backward classes and constituencies are different in different states.
different in one state also. the nature of the population, the sc/st may be more, sc may be less, backward may be more.
my lords are highly complex issues. but when you come to the legislature, you are not looking at your constituency.
you are looking at the issues of the state and the politics of the state in
the context of, including the nature of the problem that you may face in your constituency.
so my lords, in fact, the interest of the legislature, when it comes to the interests of the state, are subjugated.
the interest of his district or his particular parliamentarian state is subjugated to the larger interests of the state.
that's why it's the whip who decides what should be done, what should not be done.
but you are right. there is an element of interplay my lords.
but he can't on the context of that element in his own interest qua his constituency say that i will not obey the whip of the party.
that's the nature of the animal my lords.
and therefore my lords, he has to do that.
as far as the speaker is concerned, my lords the speaker has no choice in the matter.
speaker is only conveyed what the party conveys to him.
speaker has no individual right to say you are the whip or you are, i now proclaim you to be the whip.
they can't. here there is no over tact in the nature of the legislators calling the members of the party to have a prior meeting and thereafter the legislators themselves.
even that can be done. my lords even according to me even that can be, supposing, all of them said and the party whips said otherwise.
you are saying that the legislatures can sit together and take a decision.
yes, my lords because they will have to obey the party.
no, no, no. can the legislators sit together and say that now we are the party?
no, they can't. they can't. they can't.
only that's, only merger then my lord.
that's the only difference is paragraph four.
that can't be. this is the conundrum.
this is a conundrum which was. but the same legislators don't sit in the parliament, but go out and call for a meeting.
on the political party, yes. as a political party?
only political party. yes, they can. as a political, as if it's under the banner of a political party?
that they can't do my lords. that they can't do.
but then if they are the majority?
no, no. they are majority in the legislature.
they have the majority of the legislature there's no doubt about that, but they can't call
a meeting of the political party because they are bound by the constitution of the party.
you'll have to slightly also explain to us, how in sadiq ali they got over this problem.
for sadiq ali, i'll tell your lordships straight away, sadiq ali my lords, it's congress j, and congress o. and the court said in sadiq ali that both congress.
congress j both in the organizational wing as well as in the legislature in parliament, have a majority.
so there's no issue at all. then that kerala mani.
both. both you have to see. the organizational wing as well as that.
not one. additional. that's correct, that's correct.
there were, there were. so that's what and.
there were also identical in that, i don't know what that name in kerala, that mani?
unnikrishnan? mani. unnikrishnan? mani? i'll find out, my lords we will find out.
recent judgment of the high court.
but the question is, they are bound by the constitution, there is a constitutional procedure given by the party constitution, through which they can articulate their opinions.
which is exactly what brahmanand says. that's why i was reading it.
let's state. precisely the point. paragraph, page 12 at the bottom, about 10th line from the bottom, to take a view that the commission, page 83 of the compilations.
my lords the chief justice also asked me that question.
i'm trying to answer that. page 83 my lords, about 10th line from the bottom of that paragraph, to take a view that the commission .
lordship has that? you can mail it to the court master.
they will mail it to us. yes, even the airdrop is not coming.
which para? para 83, 10th line from the bottom, to take a view that the commission while deciding cases falling under paragraph 15.
my lords, have that? as your lordship know paragraph 15 says when factions are very pursuant to a split in the political party.
72 at 83, my lords. my lords the chief justice has that?
yes.
to take a view that the commission, while deciding cases falling under paragraph 15 of the symbol's order, should not be concerned
with the party constitution would be to introduce utter chaos in the functioning of the political parties in the country, and the
operation of the symbol's order would be rendered a play thing between the various shades of opinion or groups in the political party.
it cannot be gainsaid that a group claiming to be a particular party must abide by its own constitution which imposes contractual obligation on its members, unless it
is shown that it is, that a clear impasse had been reached where the functioning of the party could not be carried out in accordance with its own constitution.
to ensure a healthy standard of political life the commission should not lay down any procedure
which will make it easy for the established political parties to break up at the slightest pretext.
the commission considers that a group or section which wants to form a rival group within a
party, must declare itself a rival group and assert that there has been a split in the party.
it must show that it has exhausted all the remedies available to it under the constitution of the party to assert its majority but that the other
group has frustrated its efforts whimsically or capriciously, and is not itself function in accordance with the province of the constitution of the party or democratic norms.
the rival group must also show that it has no alternative but to come to the commission to establish its majority in the party.
' so the answer my lords to the question is you have to under the constitution, go to the party, make all efforts, raise your voice, articulate your opinion.
get a membership of substantial number of members of the party.
they may not be majority, even minority of the party with you, claim then that there is a split in the party.
attempt to change the leadership. you can't do that.
if you can muster up majority my lords, you will become the party.
if you can't muster up a majority my lords, then you say there is a split in the party.
then the election commission will decide who gets the symbol and that also from a future date my lords.
now the question here unfortunately is, there is no meeting of any party.
meeting of party of legislators is in assam.
what is the political party and the members of the political party in maharashtra have anything to do with the meeting, with meeting legislators in assam my lords?
and it's not even their claim. so you don't call a party meeting.
you have not called it prior to 21st june.
now my lords, what's very interesting is that in sadiq ali.
that's the principle that, your lordship must keep in mind the court said that i will not go into the actions that have taken
place after there has been a dissonance between two factions because each section has thrown out people in the other section, and vice versa.
i will take the position prior to that.
that is what was the state of the party prior to that, in this case prior to 21st june.
what is there? there is nothing prior to 21st june.
there is no split. there is no attempt to split.
there is no talk of split. so my lords how does paragraph 15 come in?
paragraph 15 comes in only when there are two factions pursuant to a split.
there is no case of a split.
the case of a split happens my lords, on the 18th july according to the petition before the election commission.
we are dealing with disqualification on 21st of june.
and 18th of july there is no meeting of the party.
there is no notice, there is no venue, there is no time, there is no evidence of any meeting.
because if there is a meeting of the party notices must also come to us because we happen to be the party.
no notice. no notice even to their own people is shown.
so my lords the question of paragraph 15 also doesn't arise.
that we will argue at 330 my lords.
this is the problem. so you don't go by the constitution.
you don't claim to have a split.
you say the legislature party or 30 of them, 38 of them are the political party and then
my lords you go with the bjp and get yourself anointed as a chief minister of the state.
now i will quickly go through what i have said so that finish it.
now i'm at para 235 my lords.
it is respectfully submitted that the exercise of discussion by the governor in inviting a person to form the government must be in accordance with constitutional provisions and values.
while democracy and rule by majority is part of the constitutional scheme, the prohibition on defection is equally a constitutional mandate.
hence while according respect to the principle of rule by majority as envisaged in a democracy governor must have regard to the constitutional prohibition on defection.
consequently, the governor is duty bound to refuse to recognize the majority that has been secured through unconstitutional means.
the scope of judicial review of the exercise of discretion by governor would necessarily extend to ensuring that the discretion was not exercised in a manner that disregard.
was exercised in a manner disregarding the constitutional methods of securing the right to govern.
my lords that decision of the governor is justiciable.
all decisions of the governor are justiciable.
so whether he could have administered an oath of office or not, my lords, in the
context of the facts before you, is a matter that is to be decided by your lordships.
and if that decision goes, my lords, everything goes.
admittedly the fact of the present case, there was no merger, as envisaged under paragraph four of the tenth schedule.
these rebel mlas have not merged in any other political party or formed a new politic party.
therefore, even if it is assumed that their two-third strengths of legislature party para four, is not at all attracted.
the president of the shiv sena uddhav had publicly admittedly not aligned supported the bjp.
in these circumstances the satisfaction of the governor for the purposes of calling upon respondent number 4 to be chief minister.
as the head of 39 rebel mlas of shiv sena, which is not endorsed by the shiv sena political party, is by itself ex facia unconstitutional.
the constitution prohibits recognition of rebel mlas of a political party under the tenth schedule and the action of the governor legitimizes what is expressly prohibited by the constitution.
the governor has sought to recognize what the constitution prohibits.
the governor is also not empowered under law to recognize who is the shiv sena.
who is the governor to say that my lord?
that is the domain of the election commission, admittedly recognition of the shiv sena and it's leadership by uddhav thackeray has been
endorsed by the election commission, and there is no dispute whatsoever or challenge before the appropriate authority, as on 30th of june.
in these circumstances the governor and his ipse dixit guided by his political masters, acted mala fide.
legally mala fide.
i don't mean any other way my lords, mala fide and in the teeth of the provisions of the
constitution granted de facto recognition to the 39 rebel mlas by inviting respondent 4 to be the chief minister.
it is submitted my lords, i'll finish it tomorrow, now, i'll talk for not more than 10-15 minutes.
i'm done my lords. all right come back…we'll resume tomorrow morning.
