lordship, we have filed a written submission after the due date so kindly allow
the nodal officer to forward it to the court master and update in the .
but on the time period, this is a little scary because
we have a suggested timeline of 12 hours and 45 minutes.
i don't think we have the luxury of time, not 12 hours.
i don't think we'll be able to spend 12 hours on this.
humble request my lord. it will at least spillover till tomorrow my lord.
we are hoping that we complete it today, but if
there's a spillover, we'll complete it in any case tomorrow.
tomorrow. after the other 7, 9 and 10.
that won't take very long. we'll just have to pass procedural directions for compilation.
my lord, so we take it that if it
doesn't get over today, then after those 7 and 9.
of course, yes. .this will continue. yes, absolutely.
we need permission my lord, to upload 4c and 5b.
volume 4c and 5b. you want to add some volumes what are they mr. sakhardande?
my lord, in 5b there are two judgments and in 4c there are some enactments.
enactments. all right.
my lords, similarly, there are one or two other judgments which we want to cite.
give them to the nodal counsel so that they can
then you know put them together in the right place.
my lord, may i also have the .
in my submissions, i noticed there's a mistake.
i've just corrected it. the wrong case has been cited.
may we have the liberty to correct that?
you can certainly correct that. tell the nodal counsel, he'll replace it.
my lord, there is one more replacement that i would
need, is a typographical error that's kept into my written submission.
my lords, i will just email the correct version.
thank you.
my lord, at the outset my lord, i will be
dealing only with the stamp act and the contract act.
to save time my lord, my colleagues, mr. sakhardande
and mr. mehta will deal with the arbitration aspect.
then your lordship may decide the sequence, whether the amicus gets
into it or mr. khambata gets into it, your lordship may
decide the sequence, but i'll take as little time as possible
because focusing only on 11(6a), stamp act and the contract act in that sequence.
now my lord, i also wanted to mention that on
the curative part, your lordship will, seven judges will decide
the main issue of the correctness of nng2, nn global 2.
yes, of course.
and then, my lord, whatever your lordship verdict, the
curative can again go back to the five judges.
then we'll see what is to be done.
that's my suggestion, because in this bench, i'm saying, my humble request is let
us not go into the curative part because we won't have time also on that.
so that may depend on the individual facts of the.
i want to say this because if your lordship
holds sets us at nng2, there are certain consequences.
if your lordship upholds nng2. my lord, volume 1 of the written module.
in our turn my lord, we'll be addressing
your lordships on curative jurisdiction, in our turn.
we are inclined as of now to send
the curative issue to a bench of five.
we lay down the principles, decide the correctness of nng2.
anyway your lordships will hear us. i don't want to interrupt the flow.
i'm going to definitely address your lordships on
this present jurisdiction, which the court is exercised.
correct. my lord.
on the issue of curative, apart from ashok hura, my lord,
your lordship will also take it that there is one more
judgment of justice dalveer bhandari, indian council for enviro legal action.
depending on what mr. shyam divan says, i'll respond to that my lord.
on to that in rejoin? in reply.
that's all. no, i'll straight away start.
your lordship has got my written submission, which is in volume 1.
now my lord, the first submission i'm making is,
if your lordship sees section 11(6a) of the act.
now my lord. where do we get that, in the compilation?
we will be using it again and again.
it would be in volume 4. volume 4a, bookmark 9.
4a? yes. page 1210. page 1210. yes.
i want your lordship to notice one thing at the outset
that section 11 has a marginal note for appointment of arbitrators.
and though the law is at marginal note may not necessarily control the interpretation,
my lord, it is definitely an aid to understanding the scope of the section.
just to set the record complete. yes.
as far as marginal note is concerned, i am just two minutes on the law.
earlier view was marginal note cannot be used in interpretation.
that was in 2005, the house of lords completely changed it and said
that look, definitely, we can consider what is the scope of this section?
what is the intention that's there?
and the reason, in england was that a marginal note was
never part of the original statute when it was enacted in parliament.
in india, margin notes are part of the draft bill, which is presented to parliament.
yes. in every finance bill you'll have the marginal note also.
so let's take that marginal note. i'm just taking one point.
it is not conclusive. no, not at all.
it's persuasive.
even justice subbarao in 59 cgs where there's ambiguity we
want to understand the scope of the section we'll get it.
but for our purposes we can take.
my lord, it is discussed in gp singh 15th edition at page 133,
and 134 the earlier law is mentioned and the later law is mentioned.
but due to shortage of time, i didn't want to get into that.
my first submission is the section reads appointment of arbitrators.
now if your lordship goes to 11(6a), 11(6a) is a case where
the supreme court or the high court are considering applications under 3 subsections.
that is, subsection 4, subsection 5, and subsection 6.
and your lordship will find that in all these subsections,
there is basically a deadlock in the appointment of an arbitrator.
either the parties cannot agree to it, or
the two arbitrators cannot agree to a chairperson.
then my lord, the court has to step and resolve the
deadlock and say, let not the arbitration procedure be stymied by this.
we are appointing so and so and move on.
so, my lord, my submission is the purpose of 11(6)(a) is to remove the
deadlock, so to speak, which arises, which necessitates an application in 4, 5, and 6.
so that's the second point i'm making.
now my lord, comes to the sorry.
yes.
now if your lordship comes to the main section
11(6a), which will be the bone of contention here.
after referring to these subsections, lordship will note, the very important point is
a non obstante clause not withstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court.
so obviously, parliament knew as per the law commission report, s.b. patel and other line
of cases, where there was a duty cast upon the court also, not just to
see the arbitration agreement, but to go further, see issues of validity and so on.
because then they said that there is no point in
referring a matter to arbitration which has so many defects.
we'll clear it in some kind of a filter process, and then we'll send it.
so they first say, notwithstanding any judgment.
therefore, the basis of all the judgments stand removed by the non obstante clause.
it doesn't override any other statute though.
pardon me? it doesn't override any other statute.
no, because there is no other statute coming in the way.
i'll come to 33(2) later of the stamp act.
and my lord, very unusually, the other point i'm making is the section 11(6a)
jurisdiction is not an inherent power of the supreme court or the high court.
it's a confined jurisdiction.
the jurisdiction has been confined by parliament and the contours of the
jurisdiction have been restricted to examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement.
now the statement of objects and reasons is set out in the
garware wall ropes judgment which your lordship will find in volume 5-a
my lord, volume 5-a, and 5-b contain all the cases my lord, main cases.
and if your lordship comes to the garware wall ropes judgment, volume 5-a.
it is in page 50. judgment starts at page 33 of volume 5-a.
53? 33 my lord. volume 5-a? 5-a my lord.
now my lord, this judgment has been followed in n global
and this judgment is relevant because it is the post 215 case.
and if your lordship, straightaway comes to para 50.
para 50? para 50. which page number in volume 5-a?
sorry. page 50, page 50, para. 13.
sorry, my apologies.
my lord, your lordships will find till para 13, the
statement of objects starts from para 6 if your lordships notes.
if your lordships sees the actual statement of objects and reasons the earlier paragraph
mentions that india is 179 out of 190 countries in the index of doing business.
this can't go on.
therefore, we have to simplify the procedure for ease of doing business.
that's the earlier part of it. but now come to para 6 at sub-clause 4.
'to provide that while considering any application for appointment of arbitrator, the high court
or the supreme court shall examine the existence of a prima facie arbitration agreement
and not other issues.' so they've expressly mentioned not other issues and that is
very important when i come to section 33, sub-section 2 of the stamp act.
for the time being, parliament is very, very clear and lordship
will note they drop prima facie when the actual 11(6)(a) comes,
but prima facie is continued in section 8, and in section 45.
but the net result is the courts shall confine itself to the
examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement and not other issues.
now your lordship will also therefore see the non obstante clause,
the word confined and only to the existence of an arbitration agreement.
now, if your lordship just goes to section 7
for a minute, you can have three possible situations.
so we go back to? section 7 of the arbitration act.
we go to volume 4-a which we .
4-a then section 7. 1207. may i read my lord?
just one second. yes.
in this part and your lordship will kindly see,- 'arbitration agreement actually is
defined in 2(a), to mean arbitration agreement means an agreement referred to in
section 7.' so the definition shifts the scope of the provision to section 7.
so 2(b) read with section 7, is the definition of arbitration agreement.
'arbitration agreement means an agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration all
or certain disputes which have arisen or which may arise between them in
respect of a defined legal relationship whether contractual or not.' so my lord
in the small sub-section there are numerous parts which my friends will deal with.
'so arbitration agreement is to submit all or certain disputes', so your lordship
knows there are something called accepted matters, that some matters will not go
to arbitration, 'which may arise in respect of a defined legal relationship.' and
this the new zealand court says, define legal relationship is because we don't
want to keep it very very vague and
broad, you should have a defined legal relationship.
that is the point.
'whether contractual or not.' so even if it's not contractual and
i can only think of say, for example, a quasi-contract under
the chapter 9 of the contract act, where it creates relationship of contract.
that also is possibly covered with this.
now this can be a simple vanilla clause where there's an arbitration.
there is a basic contract which contains an arbitration clause.
and that perhaps covers 99% of the cases where there
is a contract between the parties, it contains an arbitration clause.
but lordship will now come to 7(3).7(2),- 'an arbitration agreement may be in
the form of a clause in the contract or in the form of
a separate agreement.' so you can have a situation where the contract is
a mother agreement, so to speak, and the clause is embedded in it.
or you could have a contract. it may have a separate.
and if i may just add, whether contractual or not may
also impact like in the case of chloro control, how far
it extends to parties claiming under them, and so and so.
so those, strictly speaking, the other party may not be privity to
the contract, but it still may be covered with the arbitration clause.
but we are now basically concerned with stamping.
now, kindly come to an arbitration agreement shall be in writing.
now 4 is important. an arbitration agreement is in writing, if it is contained.
so it's actually a deeming provision. 7(4), in my humble submission, is a deeming provision.
it is taken to be in writing in abc situations.
lordship may just see (a) a document signed
by the parties, there is no dispute about that.
now (b) and (c) create problems which are sorted by saying
that if there is an arbitration agreement in correspondence, telecommunication, it
is deemed to be in writing, though the word deemed is not used.
my humble submission is parliament has created a legal fiction to say that
an arbitration agreement shall be in writing if a, b, c, if it
is contained in a document signed to the parties, an exchange of letters,
telex, telegrams, or other means of telecommunication, including communication through electronic means which
provide a record of the agreement or an exchange of statements of claim
and defence in which the existence of an arbitration
agreement is alleged by one party and not denied.
so even by the rule of non-traverse, i don't deny the allegation.
actually, the section 7(4) is inartistically worded.
what they meant to say was not that it shall be
deemed to be in writing, but there shall be deemed to
be an arbitration agreement if a, b and c are fulfilled.
yes, that there is an arbitration agreement, though the parties may not simply say that.
your lordships see what's the standard clause?
you need not have a contract where both signed the bottom.
a sends a letter to b. b responds by email
or letter and say i accept your proposal for an arbitration.
it's an arbitration agreement. yes. need not be in a formatted arbitration clause.
yes, like a template clause.
it need not be in the template clause, which says dispute shall be in arbitration.
it will be governed by so and so rules.
i propose that all our disputes about price escalation and damages be referred to arbitration.
the other party says, yes, i agree, subject to my counterclaim before the arbitrator.
it's an arbitration agreement.
and the other issue, which doesn't arise.arise in stamping in
electronic contracts, which i'll come to when i come to stamping.
you can't possibly stamp the electronic contracts at the moment, i'll come to that.
so my humble submission is when you say arbitration agreement shall be
in writing, now, what is the duty of the court under 11(6a)?
my humble submission is if the arbitration clause is embedded
in the contract itself, then the court does not need
to do anything further than say there is an arbitration clause.
that's it.
you please go ahead and whatever you want to say, say it before the arbitrators.
but suppose one party says, i've got an arbitration agreement.
he files a section, tells the other side appoint an arbitrator.
that party says, no, there is no arbitration agreement at all.
then you may refer to statement of claim, non-opposition, correspondence,
telecommunication, there could be a zoom call which is recorded.
you don't know.
so then the court will say, yes, there exists an arbitration agreement because of the
nature of the correspondence, because of the nature of the telecommunication, correspondence, and so on.
and in my humble submission, the role of the court stops there.
and your lordship will kindly note that 11(6a), lordship will
not contemporaneously or a bit late 2019 also, when 11(6a)
was amended the corresponding provision for international arbitration was section 45.
and lordship will kindly come to 45 where the duty
of the court or the jurisdiction of the court is wider.
and if your lordship will come to section 45, page 1226, there
the last part, power of judicial authority to refer to parties in arbitration.
parties to arbitration, notwithstanding anything contained in part 1 or the code of civil procedure.
lordship will note here there is a non obstante clause, qua statutes.
a judicial authority when seized of an action in a matter
in respect to which parties have made an agreement referred to
in section 44, shall, at the request of one of the
parties or any person claiming through or under him, refer the parties to arbitration.
now, this is important unless a prima facie finds that the
arbitration agreement is null and void inoperative and incapable of being performed.
and one thing, prima facie has been brought in, in 2019.
now lordship will note that, when the law commission report.
246 law commission report came, they wanted to restrict the
jurisdiction of the court under11(6a) to existence and null and void.
if a lordship sees the law commission report, that
makes it very clear and it is in paragraph.
it comes with para 22 and para 44 of the judgment of nng 2.
volume in page.
yes, it starts at 302 and lordship will kindly come to para
44, which is at internal page 57, which should be page 360.
yes. page 360. just one minute. 358 of the pdf page.
paragraph? paragraph 44.
now my lord, the extract from the law
commission report the relevant part is para 33.
lordships may just read 32.
in relation to the nature of intervention, the exposition of the law is
to be found in the decision of the supreme court in shin-etsu, where
the supreme court has ruled in favour of looking at the issues/controversy only prima facie.
33 is important and it has been italicised.
it is in this context, the commission has recommended the amendments
to section 8 and 11 of the arbitration and conciliation act 1996.
the scope of judicial interventions only restricted to situations where the court/judicial authority
finds that the arbitration agreement does not exist or is null and void.
now, my lord may kindly note, or is null and void
is not added in the ultimate law which is made by parliament.
'null and void' is there in 45 but
'null and void' is not there in 11(6a).
my humble submission is, if the law commission's.
sorry.
my humble submission is, if parliament had chosen to put in 11(6a) both
existence and also null and void, then your lordship's jurisdiction would have been broader.
but by deliberately deciding not to add null and
void, they have further restricted the jurisdiction to existence.
and this they further emphasized by using the word 'confined'.
so now my lord.
and actually, when they enacted 6(a), 6(a)came by act 3 of 2016.
at that time in section 45, the word null and void was already in existence.
it was. except that prima facie came in 2019, so parliament had before it.
yes.
the provision of section 45, where the power of the court was,
in that sense, extended to determining whether the agreement was null and void.
and they didn't follow that formula for domestic arbitration.
yes. and also section 8. your lordships see section 8, that is also much wider.
this is existence of a. mr. datar there will be difficulty in accepting that argument.
pardon me, my lord.
that section 8, the power of the court is wider compared to section 11.
no, i'm not saying. otherwise, fastest finger first, everybody will start filing petitions, civil suits.
no. at the moment we're only concerned at 11(6a) and stamp act.
there is some difficulty in this argument also.
existence can be something which is null and void cannot exist.
no, my lord.
so there is no. parliament also when it enacts, it does keeps out redundant words.
so confine.
won't it will be better for you to confine yourself to the issue in question?
11(6a). only my.
only submission is relating to the issue which i'll come to it later.
relating to the stamp act? yes, stamp act.
only my submission is which i'll just elaborate it later, if necessary.
in a landmark essay called 'metaphysics of nullity', where
they say nullity and voidness are de jure concepts.
an agreement can exist in fact, but it could be null and void
in law, like a notification, which is ultra vires, the act exists in fact.
but unless it is struck down, still it exists in fact, but not in law.
but at the moment i'll take your lordships hint.
i'll straight away go to 11(6a). so my submission is.
no, i was answering my lord, the chief justice's question.
that's fine.
no, what i'm saying is when the draftsman sat
down and prepared 11, 6(a) where is judicial intervention?
what's the role of the courts?
it's in section 11, it's in 8, it's in
9, it's in 14, it's in 34 and so on.
so in the case of appointment of arbitrator you have 11 and 45.
45 has null and void . here they've dropped null and void.
so my submission is if the agreement is null and void, still
my lord, the court can't go into this question on, as for
existence is concerned, say no, no there is no arbitration agreement at all.
it's barred by limitation.
i'll come to that because howsoever the court may want to be a sentinel
on the , so to speak, and filter out meaningless arbitrations nevertheless, in the
interest of the arbitration law itself, the court must confine itself to what parliament says.
just see the existence of an arbitration agreement.
because 16 talks of validity, lordship will see section 16 for a moment.
lordship sees section 16. if i take your lordships, 45 is null and void.
page 1214. which are you referring to?
4(a) my lord. page 1214. 1214? yes.
16-1 at page 1214. and i'll go straight away to the stamp act.
'the arbitral tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction, including ruling on any objections
with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement, and for that
purpose.' so my lord, this is there from
day one, from the 1990s from day one.
it gives an hint that the tribunal has to see existence itself.
if there's an arbitration existence, then it may have to
go into the issue of validity, because once the arbitration
agreement exists, it may become invalid on so many other grounds.
but there's an arbitration agreement. so existence and validity are basically two different concepts.
s. b. patel introduced validity at the appointment stage and that was expressly rejected later.
your lordship will find s. b. patel was noticed by the
nng 1 and there they say that, no, we will not.
s. b. patel expressly says that we will go into validity.
also, the duty of the court is to go into validity.
and that is then taken off by the amendment.
and that your lordship will find. lordship will come to 5-a page.
lordship will just bear with me for a moment.
they refer to s.b. patel. the extract is s.b. patel, para 38, page 355.
now about the extract para 12 of sbp and lordship
will just come to, above para 39, the italics portion.
where are you reading mr. datar? page 353.
it starts para 38. at volume 5-a?
yes, volume 5-a, yes my lord.
and lordship will just go to the end of the paragraph which
is on the next page and just above para 39, the italics portion.
my lord has got the italics portion?
we are inclined to the view that the decision of the chief justice
on the issue of jurisdiction and the existence of a valid arbitration agreement
would be binding on the parties when the matter goes to the arbitral
tribunal and at subsequent stages, except in appeal, so and so and so and so.
so in this entire paragraph, they say, the chief justice must.
above para 39. if your lordship wants, come to placitum b of the same page.
the question in the context of subsection 7 of section
11 is, what is the scope of the right comfort
to rule upon its own jurisdiction, once the chief justice, etc.?
then they say that at the appointment stage under 11, the chief justice
has to go into the jurisdiction and existence of a valid arbitration agreement.
and once he decides that it's binding on the arbitral tribunal.
so i'll just say that as far as 11(6a) is concerned, in 2015 they have
made it absolutely clear that you confine yourself to the existence of an arbitration agreement.
do not go into validity.
now, one more thing we should note, because whatever your lordship decides will impact
the further law, because now they are going to delegate the power to institution.
that's a proposal which has not yet been notified.
once an arbitral institution is to go into appoint an arbitrator, then that
institution has no jurisdiction to go into the issues of other aspects at all.
they will simply appoint, and then leave it to the arbitrator to decide.
mr. datar, therefore, 11(6a) is no longer, it's been 2019 and now.
it's not been notified. it's not been notified.
they'll not be notified because of the institution not being.
yes, yes. otherwise once the institutions are functional.
yes. no, i'm saying that all that is part of a scheme.
there's no connect between institutionalization in the form and the earlier annexure.
no. what i'm submitting is section 11 is the appointment stage,
what we call the pre arbitration stage or the pre-referral stage.
now, since your lordships asked question, there are clear distinctions.
you can't appoint an arbitrator. therefore, the arbitration cannot start.
court intervenes and says, justice so and so, or mr. so
and so is the arbitrator or the chairperson, you start moving.
then you go to section 16. before 16 you argue on existence and validity.
now come to 34. i'm saying it's a full scheme.
existence is by the court.
existence and validity is by the arbitral tribunal and the correctness of the
arbitral tribunal on validity is then part of a limited judicial review under 34.
so, lordship see 34(2)(a)(ii).
so if you now get into validity, you are really rupturing the
entire scheme in my humble submission because validity is left to the arbitrator.
they decide the validity. the arbitral tribunal decision is not final.
it's subject to judicial review by a 34 court.
under 34(111)222. please come to 34(2)(a)(ii). sorry.
so lordship, kindly see the arbitration .
34(2)(a)(ii) arbitration agreement is not valid under the law, in which
so that existence is not part of their only the validity.
and i'm just thinking to myself, lordship, i remember our law college days.
we learned that all contracts are agreements, but all agreements are not contracts.
that we studied in the law college.
so i would say use that analogy to say, that every valid
arbitration agreement exists, but every existing arbitration agreement need not be valid.
an arbitration agreement may be there.
and i'll come to mulla's passage, which is quoted in this.
that's why when i come to contract, i'm going
to point out the word void contract is an oxymoron.
you can't say that, but i'll come to stamp act later.
so, my submission is i'll conclude my submissions on section 7, 11, 16 and
34 and say that validity has gone into the arbitral tribunal area subject to
a check under 34 and of course to an appeal under 37 and 136.
now let me come to straight to the stamp act.
how does this. yes, sorry.
now i am coming straight away to the stamp
act and lordship will come to page 394, volume 5-a.
which is the nng 2 judgment.
and before reading it, i'll just give a
broad overview of what i wanted to submit.
394 of volume 5-a. this is the part of the nng 2 majority judgment.
394. volume 5-a? 5-a. i'm not going to read all the paragraph.
i'll just show lordship what the majority has held.
then i'll just come to the conclusion.
my apologies. no, no, we apologize.
now just i'll tell lordship broadly what is
the view taken by the majority in that.
what they say is the stamp act to the fiscal enactment.
it has got his own importance.
it's a source of revenue for the state and under section
33, when the document is tendered, which is not stamped or
inadequately stamped, then the judicial authority or the holder of public office.
has to impound it. .has to impound it.
now.
my lord, what is important is 33(2) and 33(2) cast a duty to examine,
because as a lordship knows, it could not be stamped, it could be inadequately stamped.
there could be very many situations. is it coming under which item of the schedule?
what's the quantum of stamp duty? inadequacy?
all these issues are there. that has to be examined in terms of 33(2).
and what the majority says is that it is our duty, 11(6a) is a
duty to examine the existence of an arbitration agreement, 33(2) cast a duty upon
us to examine the correctness of the stamp, so both are in different compartments.
the fact that my jurisdiction under 11(6a) is limited to examination
does not mean that i cannot confine my duty to 33(2).
and in my humble submission, that is an error of the
majority because parliament has decided, you don't worry about stamping in
that sense, you just deal with the existence of an arbitration agreement.
stamping is a matter of validity. stamping, registration, limitation.
all this goes to validity. let that be decided.
but what the majority says is the document is under our watchful gaze.
and if we notice that the document is
not stamped, then we necessarily have to 33(2).
my humble submission is even if under the watchful gaze, you notice it is
not stamped, under 11(6)(a) today you're confined to only existence of an arbitration agreement.
the statement of objects and reason states, you will not deal with other issues.
i don't mean to be disrespectful, but i'm just saying, in a
matter of speaking, what parliament says is let the courts confine to
existence, all other issues, let it be relegated to the arbitral tribunal.
ultimately, what is the purpose? the arbitration must be fast tracked as much as possible.
the judicial pit stop must be very, very limited.
under section 11 or 8, very very limited.
let it go to arbitration because parties have
agreed that my dispute will be resolved by arbitration.
and in great your lordship said, all these
are issues which interminably delay the arbitration proceedings.
stamping, registration, validity, limitation.
the court need not go into it, but just see the passages.
yes. in my humble submission, these require to be overruled is my respectful submission.
which is the paragraphs you want us to see?
it starts at. just give us the paragraphs first.
we'll make a note and then quickly brief those paragraphs.
yes.
lordships will just come to para 146 now, my
lord, paras which you think are important so that.
so i don't need to read it my lord?
we'll read them but if you can just tell us which.
yes. para 146 from placitum d. 146 are the contentions.
at page 394 of volume 5. now para 147 is important.
then my lord, the final conclusion is at para 150, 151, 152.
para 146, 147, 150, 151, 152. these are the important paras.
these are the only paras? these are only paras.
and what about the minority?
minority goes into the aspect, both justice rastogi and justice roy
says that, look, it's not our concern to do that at all.
can you just give us the paragraph's number later?
i'll give you the paragraph number.
in fact, apart from this, justice roy goes into
the aspect of section 5 of the arbitration act.
his lordship compares a uncitral model with section 5.
i'm coming to that. so i just finished 33(2).
please see, 33(2). can i just read this paragraph first?
sorry my lord? para 146 at page 394, in volume 5-a.
heading starts section 33 'the court or the arbitrator to act'.
my humble submission is lordship will see at page 90, which is page 394.
it's sub-para alphabet (o), and the question the court puts to itself is section
33 and 35 of the stamp act, the court or the arbitrator to act.
and the court rules that the court has to act.
and in my humble submission, that is against the mandate
of section 11(6a) read with section 5 of the arbitration
act and i'll make good my submission in the context of 33(2).
may i just read the paragraphs first and then go to the statutory.
please see para 147. para 146 is the rival contentions.
now, please come to para 47. we see merit in the contention of the appellant.
apart from the court acting in consonance with the law, when it
adheres to section 33 and 35 of the stamp act, when it
applies, in our view, under a watchful gaze of the court, be
it the high court or the supreme court, the issue related to
stamp duty in a case where there is no stamp duty paid is best resolved.
so this law is that when the court sees that there
is no stamp duty paid, it immediately impounds the document and proceeds.
then the question would arise as follows.
a document containing the arbitration clause may not bear any stamp duty.
we have already found that even in an arbitration agreement on its
own may require to be stamped as submitted by the learned amicus.
but then the court can proceed on the basis that
the amount of stamp duty which the arbitration agreement contained
in an arbitration clause would be executable to be extremely meagre.
there is very little likelihood of such an arbitration agreement not being stamped.
therefore, what the court is to consider is when the contract in which
the arbitration clause is contained is not duly stamped, then it becomes a
duty of the court to act under 33 and 35 of the stamp act.
then they discuss a background of section 11(6a).
i'll skip that with your lordship's permission.
now 150.
the question further arises as to whether in view of the power
of the court under section 11(a) to find only prima facie the
existence of the arbitration agreement, it would enable the court to make
a reference and appointment and relegate the issue of impounding the document to the arbitrator.
in any shirking of the statutory duty by the court under section 11(a), to act
in tune with the peremptory authority dictate of the stamp act appears to us unjustifiable.
such abdication of its plain duty is neither contemplated by the law
giver, nor would it be justifiable as causing the breach of section 11(6a).
now 152 is the final conclusion.
the view that cases under section 11 would consume more time and hinder
the timely progress of arbitration, and that the matter must be postponed so
that the arbitrator will be more suitably deal with it does not appeal to us.
while the stamp act is primarily intended to collect revenue and it is not
intended to arm a litigant to raise technical pleas, this would hardly furnish justification
for the court, to ignore the voice of the legislature couched in unambiguous terms.
we find that the view expressed in sms tea estates being
reiterated, despite the insertion of 11(6a), would promote the object of
the stamp act, and yet be reconcilable with the mandate of section 11(6a).
we may, however, qualify what we have said with the caveat.
there may be cases where no stamp duty has been paid, it paves the way
for the unambiguous discharge of the duty under 33 and 34 for the stamp act.
there may be however cases, where it may be stamped, but
the objection is taken by the party that it's not duly stamped.
in such cases, no doubt it is ordered as the duty of the
court, to examine the matter with reference to the duty under section 33(2).
if the claim that is insufficiently stamped appears on the.
appears to the court to be on the face of it, wholly without
foundation, it may make reference on the basis of existence of an arbitration agreement.
otherwise, and then leave it open to the arbitrator, to
exercise the power under section 33, should it become necessary.
this approach, just does justice to the word examine in 33(2) of the stamp act.
while not ignoring the command of section 11(6a) of the act.
it is not to be confused with the duty to examine prima
facie whether an arbitration agreement exists under section 11(6a), but is related
to the duty to examine the matter under section 33(2) of the stamp act.
now this particular passage says, the court has two duties 11(6)(a) is existence, 33(2)
is stamp and my power under 11(6a), does not take away my duty under 33(2).
and my humble submission is, that is in
the teeth of section 5, of the arbitration act.
now please see 33(2), and please see section 5.
kindly come to 33(2) of the stamp act volume 4-a.
the stamp act starts at page 324 and 33 is at page 357.
and if i may read that, please come to page 357 volume 4-a.
lordship has got 33(1).
may i read now 33(1) and 33(2), then
i'll come to section 5 of the arbitration.
every person having by law, or consent of parties authority to receive
evidence, and every person in charge of a public office, except an
officer of police, before who many instruments chargeable in his opinion with
duty is produced or comes in the performance of his function shall,
if it appears to him that such instrument is not duly stamped, impound the same.
therefore my lord the jurisdiction is conferred upon authorities who can receive evidence
and office people who are holding public office, he shall impound the same.
now 33(2) is important.
for that purpose, every such person shall examine every instrument so chargeable
and so produced or coming before him in order to ascertain whether
it is stamped with a stamp duty of the value and description
required by the law enforced in india, when such instrument was executed or first executed.
now 33(2) is a very wide duty.
you have to examine what, examine whether it is of the
proper value, valuation, description, which is classification, is it a license?
is it a lease? is it a bottom rebond?
we had a lot of controversy mortgage by, whether it's
what you call mortgage, a conditional mortgage, different types of mortgage.
what is the stamp duty? lease license is a common problem.
so you have to examine whether it's a value and the description
required by a law, when such instrument was executed or so and so.
and my lord, provided all these things are there which says
that, nothing contained shall deem to require a magistrate to examine
or impound if it does not so things fit an instrument.
but on the limited point of 33(2), i am
submitting that the word 33 includes a verb examine.
the impounding under 33(1) has to be done after examination under 33(2).
so 33(2) comes first, you prima facie see there's a document.
it's not stamped. then you exercise, pause under 33(2) and then you.
now please come to section 5 of the arbitration act which.
1207 in volume 4-a.
and in that context, i would rather your lordship sees the minority
judgment of justice roy, where his lordship extracts section 5, the uncitral
model, section 5 of the act, so everything will come in one place.
please come to para 341 of the nng 2 decisions.
para 341. page number? page i'll just.455 yes, yes.
455 of volume 5-a. i'll start with 341.
your lordships has got 341, 342?
have all your lordships got 341, minority view of justice roy.
it's very important.
further on reading article 5 of the model law and section
5 of the arbitration act 1996, which cover the provisions for
judicial intervention in arbitral proceedings, it is clear that parliament went
beyond article 5 of the uncitral model law and added a non-obstante clause.
to substantiate this point, it is pertinent to quote the provisions in full.
article 5 of the uncitral model law reads us under,-'
extent of court intervention in matters governed by this law,
no court shall intervene except where so provided in this law.
' now please come to 5, 'extent of judicial intervention not
withstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
enforced, in matters governed by this part, no judicial authority shall
intervene, except when where so provided in this part' which is part 1.
so the.
of a non obstante clause covering statute law in 11(6a), it is
really dealt with by this omnibus non obstante clause in section 5.
no. yes. i'm grateful. i'm just putting for your lordship's kind consideration a further point.
now, 33(2) was already there when the arbitration act '96
came in. there's an examination on the correctness of stamp duty.
there is no doubt that your lordship exercising powers
under 11(6a) is an authority which can receive evidence.
my humble submission is 5 must be read with section 11(6a).
and when so read, it will prevail over 33(2) because these
judicial intervention powers of the supreme court and the high court
intervention will only be to the extent provided in part 1.
because it says 'so provided' and the word
so provided means only existence of arbitration agreement.
and the word examine is used in 11(6a) examine is used in 33(2).
there are two types of examinations.
and the stamp act examination is expressly excluded, is my humble submission.
your lordships may kindly consider. now, while lordship is on this.
lordship will now come to an interesting paragraph.
now i'm. yes, i'm now coming to the.
i'm now going into the. how does the majority deal with section 5?
pardon me? how does the majority deal with section 5 in nng2?
no, this is just extracted.
but subject to correction only justice roy deals with these uncitral model law.
let's see that. pdf page? 388. let's see that right away.
yes, i'm grateful. sorry. i missed this.
section 5, no doubt provides for a non obstante clause.
it provides against judicial interference, except as provided in the act.
the non obstante clause purports to proclaim.
so despite the presence of any law which may provide for interference
otherwise, however this does not mean that the operation of the stamp
act, in particular 33 and 35 would not have any play we
are of the clear view of that the purport of 5 is
not to take away the effect of 33 and 35 of the stamp act.
in my humble submission, where the majority erred is,
33 and 35 is not given a go by.
it will be taken up by the arbitral tribunal.
and the object was to really therefore constitute part 1 as a code in itself.
yes, yes, absolutely. and i'm going to come to further 35 and 36.
so the limits at least in so far as judicial intervention is concerned, the
limits of intervention were intended to be exhaustively specified within the ambit of part 1.
otherwise what you're doing is, actually with such a barrier is
posed, we are putting a coach and flow through that barrier.
we're saying no, no. i have got 11(6a)
power, but my power under 33(2) also continue.
i'm saying both can't continue.
and the idea is, it's not that revenue will be lost or things will go.
this will come before the arbitral tribunal and lordship will
further come to section 35 of the stamp act and 36.
suppose in the course of arbitration, i tender an agreement
and the other side doesn't raise an objection to stamp.
really stamping is nothing to do with validity as such.
sorry. nothing to do with validity. it deals with taxability.
it deals with taxability and enforceability. an unstamped agreement is not invalid.
it cannot be used as an evidence.
therefore, it cannot be cited as an exhibit.
it will affect its enforceability. there is a specific provision in stamp act?
yes and i may also point out.
the issue is where will it be debated?
is it debated before the . it's a forum issue.
yes. so it's not that if the court ignores it, it is going to escape.
and i want to make one further submission.
35 is very clear. the 35 says, it will not be admissible in evidence.
that's all. yes, but you please see section 36 of the arbitration act.
mr. datar, that's the reason when you are going repeatedly
on validity, i didn't want to interrupt you because it’s
not really a. stamp act has got nothing to do with validity.
exactly. exactly. no my lords, what will happen is i'm going to come to that.
when i come, there's a very good passage extracted by the majority from mulla.
please come to 36. page 36 of stamp act?
of the stamp act. that will be page 358.
360. top.
i think once it is admitted in evidence, it is not cannot be called off.
yes, that's going to be because the majority says an agreement not stamped
is non existing law, which i'm going to come to later on contract.
it's bereft of existence that may not be a correct proposition.
if an agreement and that's what jhaverchand says.
on payment of penalties. my lord, i was going to say one thing.
i sign an agreement. i don't stamp it.
now i run the risk, if i don't stamp it
under section 17 stage, at execution stage, tomorrow, if i
want to enforce it, i have to pay ten times the duty.
so i take the risk.
i know many cases where the arbitration clause is contained on
the back of a bill, or it's contained in some letter.
number of contracts take place between multiple parties.
i don't want to go every time and get
a non-judicial stamp, get rs. 100, witness, et cetera.
i don't need it. i got an agreement.
i got a very good agreement.
and again, the difficulty of the majority judgment is,
suppose you say that it was an arbitration clause.
it's not denied. how do you stamp that?
it's in a telecommunication, electronic record. now the amendments have been made.
that electronic record is a document.
issue that, we are told that now, on the basis
of nng2, all existing arbitrations and objections is being raised.
how could this? i'm coming to that.
because non-existing law, not exist.
36 is a clear answer, but once the document is marked in
evidence, then, their instrument cannot be questioned on the ground of insufficient stamping.
that's why in jhaverchand, the supreme court points
out that the party has to be vigilant.
if it does not take the objection at that stage and allows the
document to be marked or be normal p1, p7 or whatever it is.
then once it's marked as an exhibit, you can't as the.
says at any stage of the proceeding, you can't then say
that, look, it's not stamped, you should not have acted upon it.
so my humble submission is, to conclude my submission 33(2) examination, qua stamping.
just, can you just formulate this, mr. datar?
my humble submission is, the majority judgment on this duty of the
court, to impound the document is incorrect because, the majority did not
notice section 5, did not consider section 5, of the arbitration conciliation act.
we did not apply section 5. apply section 5.
because they noticed it. correct, correct. they noticed.
i'm sorry. my apologies. did not apply section 5.
in fact, they say section 5, doesn't overtake my duty under 33(2).
so my submission is because of section 5 read with section 11(a), the judicial intervention,
so it contemplates that the court notices there is a flaw, there is a defect.
but the court says, don't intervene because, it now must go
to the arbitral tribunal where all these issues will be dealt with.
so once judicial intervention is confined to existence of an arbitration agreement, the jurisdiction to
examine stamping under 33(2) is taken away when court exercises powers under 11(6a), that's all.
and with that i'll come to contract act.
now, my lord, the more than stamp act, the difficulty in the nng judgment
is to say that if an agreement is not stamped, it is bereft of
existence, it is void and the majority says, voidness and enforceability are conflated out together.
which i humbly submit, it may not be a correct interpretation of the contract
act, because lordship kindly sees, they take 2(g) and 2(h) of the contract act.
i'll come to the definitions.
and then they say that if an agreement is not stamped, it is void.
in my humble submission, if an agreement is not stamped, it
is not void, it's a curable defect because it's an agreement
filed under 2(g), 2(h), section 10, and section 23 of the contract act.
and while on. and 28, also. permission.
i'll read the statutory provision, and then i'll try to submit that the judgment
may not be in consonance with what is the statutory provision on contract law.
now, what they basically say is, if an agreement is not
stamped, it is not a contract, it's not an enforceable contract.
and i'll show to your lordships, that is
not in my humble submission, not the correct view.
but that's directly contrary with the statute itself.
that's my submission. statute merely makes it inadmissible in evidence.
that's all, and what. it's a statute for the collection of revenue.
so the cloud and the document on its
admissibility, not in the document of the transaction.
the cloud on its admissibility is listed by the payment of revenue
and the penalty for not having paid it in the first place.
my lord, our concern is apart is.
as your lordship put it, apart from at various stages this
point is being raised and everything is come to a standstill.
should you not fortify your last argument of agreement
being void relying on hindustan steel, para 6 and 7?
yes, yes. just kindly read it. hindustan steel vs dalip construction?
correct. kindly read two paragraphs 6 and 7 respectively.
that's at page 588.
what has just fallen from my lord, the
chief justice apropos what you argued the last.
yes, yes. before you take over contract act.
the last part. at page 588 my lord?
588. it's a three-judge bench decision.
hindustan steel is actually 1969 (1) scc 597 at 600.
correct and it's a part of your paper book.
yes, may i read paragraphs 6 and 7.
i'll read para 5. yes. may i read page 588, volume 5.
an instrument which is not duly stamped cannot be received in
evidence by any person who has authority to receive evidence, and
it cannot be acted upon by that person or by any public officer.
section 35 provides that the admissibility of an instrument once admitted in evidence, shall
not accept in section 61, be called in question at any stage of the
same or proceeding on the ground that the instrument has not been duly stamped.
relying on the difference in the physiology between 35 and 36, it was urged
that an instrument which is not duly stamped may be admitted in evidence on
payment of duty and penalty, but it cannot be acted upon because 35 operates
as a bar to the admission and evidence of the instrument not duly stamped,
as well as to be acted upon and the legislature by section 36 in
the conditions set out therein, removed the bar
only against admission and evidence of the instrument.
the argument ignores the true import of 36.
by that section, an instrument, once admitted in evidence, shall not
be called in question at any stage of the same suit
or proceeding on the ground that it has not been duly stamped.
section 36 does not provide a challenge.
does not prohibit a challenge against an instrument that it
shall not be acted upon because it is not duly stamped.
but on that account there is no bar against an instrument
not being duly stamped, being acted upon after payment of stamp
duty and penalty according to the procedure prescribed by the act.
the doubt is, if any, is removed by the terms of 42, which
enact in terms unmistakable every instrument endorsed that they collect under 42(1) shall
be admissible in evidence, and may be acted upon, if it is duly stamped.
7, i'll read. stamp was a fiscal measure.
it's more important. yeah.
to enact, to secure revenue for the state
on certain issues, on certain classes of instruments.
it is not enacted to arm a litigant with a
weapon of technicality to meet the case of his opponent.
the stringent provisions of the act are conceived in the interests of the revenue.
once that object is secured according to law, the parties taking his claim on the
instrument will not be defeated on the ground of the initial defect in the instrument.
viewed in that light, the scheme is clear.
section 35 of the stamp act operates as a bar to
an unstamped instrument being admitted in evidence or being acted upon.
section 40 provides a procedure for the instruments being impounded.
42(1) provides for certifying that instrument is duly stamped, and
42(2) enacts the consequences resulting of it and they go.
high court to the contrary.
as an aside, justice m.c. desai, whose judgement was just overruled,
was one of those last few ics judges in the indian judiciary.
justice manoj misra will confirm. i think he was an ics judge in those days.
and i think allahabad had an english judge,
justice broome, who was there well after independence.
he continued till almost '73, '74. falshaw was in punjab.
most of the english judges left, but he continued.
now my submission is this and your lordship will take page 369 of majority.
they doubt.
to answer justice pardiwala's question, nn global majority doubts hindustan steel at para 69.
lordship will come to page 368. 368, volume 5, volume 5-a, page 368.
para 69 at page 368 of volume 5-a.
my lord, in the light of what justice pardiwala asked, hindustan
steel, there is a slight doubt expressed on hindustan steel in
the majority judgment of nng 2, which is at page 368, para 69.
though they don't expressly say it's bad law.
para 69 at the bottom of volume 5-a.
page 368 is very.
here also the power of impounding is only when it is produced before an authority.
correct.
it's not, if you keep it with yourself, there is no impounding,
neither any proceedings under 31, 33, etc, etc. don't apply, 33 is .
i'll just give an example.
when i was a junior and had a lot of work
in the city civil court and what, there was a particular
well known company, which had number of agreements with agents, 400, 500 agents.
and out of 400, 500, 10 or 15 will
default and they were very, very keen on litigation.
they would not spare anybody.
so they would file suits and only in
those recalcitrant agents, they'll pay 10% the stamp duty.
and the proprietor told me, why should i spend money on every agreement?
everybody's not going to default.
whenever a party defaults, that alone i'll pay ten
times the stamp duty, and it's a commercial call.
why not?
because 99 agents will comply with the law, the one person who don't comply is.
i'm also thinking to myself, what about electronic contracts?
now they are also taken as documents.
you simply say i agree, clickwrap, shrink-wrap.
there's a dispute, i suppose i don't know how it's going to test it.
in those cases where there's a dispute, you take a print out, stamp it.
and my lord, what the majority finds fault is, that they
have not taken note of section 17, which is the taxable event.
but lordship knows, in tax, there's always a
difference between taxable event and the actual payment.
here what they say is, you take a risk.
you either pay the stamp duty at the section 17 stage, if
you miss the bus or if you take a calculated risk of
not paying at the section 17 stage, then when you come to
35, 42, etc. you'll pay ten times the amount with the penalty.
and there's also penalty under 62, which says that
whatever extra you pay will be adjusted against the penalty.
so my only submission is, as my lord slightly pointed out,
this will not make the instrument, it's not fatal to the instrument.
the arbitration agreement exists, the contract exists.
it only remains unenforceable.
so these passages may require to be overruled is my humble submission.
shall i take the section first and then the
passage or the passage first and then the section?
section first. please come to the contract act.
yes my lord, and one more thing i'll mention, one other argument
i'm going to take, but mr. sakhardande elaborated, my humble view is
that arbitration agreement, because stamp act uses the word article 5's agreement.
can it include an arbitration agreement?
there's a serious doubt, because there's a residuary clause, agreements not elsewhere specified.
but all these require instruments, now one argument which we'll develop is
that, arbitration agreement need not be stamped in terms of the stamp act.
that he will elaborate further. we don't need to go into that, here at all.
no, i'll just leave it to your lordships, because n global holds.
my lord, in para 90. sorry, in para 90.
just to answer your lordship's question, which mr. sakhardande will deal with.
in para 90, they formulate the question and
say, is an arbitration agreement liable to be stamped?
and in fact, in my curative also what's happened is, it's an agreement to lease.
if an arbitrate, if an arbitration agreement is contained in the larger
contract, suppose the main contract stamping is 1000, but it's only an
agreement to sell, not a sale per se, and there's an arbitration agreement.
suppose i put it to rs. 100, some cases they put arbitration agreement stamp.
here agreement is mentioned in article 5, and the last
is like a residuary clause, agreement is not elsewhere specified.
but the nature of 7(1), 7(2), 7(3) shows that arbitration agreement, has
not been included in the, for example, in the case of award,
supreme court has said award doesn't include a foreign award, for stamp act purposes.
so maybe agreement, that's what we will consider, your lordships
may decide whether to take it up or not later.
so i'll straight away, come to the contract act.
now, my lord, what is the role of the contract?
we are really on the narrow issue as to what
is the stage at which a dispute about stamping has
to be decided, does it arrive at the stage of 11(6)?
yes.
whether an arbitration agreements should or should not be stamped
ultimately and we don't have the stakes here before us, so.
and by humble submission is.
the contract act in para 152, the majority makes a division.
if it is absolutely without foundation, they can step in.
if it is partly without foundation, it has to be left to the arbitrator.
my humble submission that creates a lot of uncertainty in the law.
that's why they said if it is not absolutely under
stamped, it is insufficiently stamped, then send it to the arbitrator.
send it to the arbitrator. if you find that there is no foundation.
prima facie no foundation in the objection to stamp.
my humble submission is . that's the distinction.
that's the distinction. i'm saying that should not be made because.
my lord, as mr. metha rightly points out, please come to para 166.
para 152 they say sufficiently stamped insufficient.
but para 166 and 167 are clear.
which page? page 399. these are the two observations which.
your lordships will see 166, 167. all your lordships have got it?
at page?
at page 399, volume 5-a, an arbitration agreement within the meaning
of section 7 of the act, which attracts stamp duty and
which is not stamped or insufficiently stamped, cannot be acted upon.
in view of section 35 of the stamp act, unless following impounding and payment
of the requisite duty necessary certificate is provided under section 42 of the act.
' so they say, at 11(6a) you stop.
where do they deal with section 36?
next para. they don't deal with section 36.
this is subject to correction. they note it here.
but they don't deal. i'm coming to that.
exactly coming to 36. next paragraph.
'we further hold that the provisions of 33 and the bar under
35 applicable to instruments chargeable to stamp duty under section 3 read
with schedule would render the arbitration agreement contained in such instrument as
being non-existent law unless the instrument is validated under the stamp act'.
this is completely in the teeth of 36.
if the agreement is non-existent in law, it can't even keep 36.
36.what it says is if you don't take
the objection to stamping, you can't question it later.
you can't say it's not existing in law.
sorry. to answer lordship para 108(a). page 381 volume 5(a), paragraph 108.
going over the page to 382. 381 but it spills out to 182.
yeah, equally placitum a. your lordship has seen that?
my humble submission is both para 166 and 167, in my humble submission, do not
represent the correct position of law and the correct proposition should be that if the
agreement, first of all, under 11(6a), you do not need to look into stamp act.
the last sentence of paragraph 108. just read that.
start from one sentence above that. that's an unstamped or insufficient piece.
yes. placitum. b. now i'll just read it further.
equally under section 36(1). that's better.
my lord justice khanna asked me to point
draw attention to para 108 at page 381.
all your lordships may kindly come to page 382, placitum a, my lord.
equally, the third line, under section 36, in the case of an
instrument, not secondary evidence of the instrument which is allowed to be
let in evidence without objection, then it would qualify as evidence founding a right.
but this is an exception to the rule
found in section 35 of the stamp act.
thus, an unstamped or insufficiently stamped instrument representing a case of an
agreement which is not being enforceable in the sense that the sanctions
in law through a civil action is impermissible in the said sense invalid.
it is not invalid or void in the sense of it being still born
or null and void or in the sense that life cannot be poured into it.
now, while they say this, i'll show other paragraph where they
say once an agreement is not stamped, it is completely void.
it is bereft in law.
now, since your lordship is seeing that, i'll just
with the court's permission, go to the other paragraphs.
please come to para 103. i'll just take your lordship to 103, and then 109.
lordships will just come to 103, on stamping.
may i read 103 at page 380?
we would find that an agreement which is unenforceable on account of a
substantive law, which would include the stamp act would not be a contract.
applying section 2(h) of the contract act, it is only
if the agreement is enforceable that it would become a contract.
it is only a contract which should be the arbitration
agreement which is contemplated in section 11(6a) of the act.
it may not be apposite to merely describe
an unstamped arbitration agreement as a curable defect.
as long as it remains an unstamped instrument, it cannot be taken notice
of for any purpose, as contemplated in section 35 of the stamp act.
it remains unenforceable.
section 17 declares the time at which instrument is executed in india must be stamped.
the said provision contemplates that stamping of such an instrument must
take place before or at the time of execution of the document.
no public officer, nor court, nor arbitrator can any.
permit any person to ask them to act upon it, or receive it as evidence.
in law, it is bereft of life.
it is not unenforceable in law. it is not enforceable in law.
in the said sense, it also cannot exist in law.
it would be void.
our view in this regard is that voidness is conflated
with to enforce unenforceability receives fortification, from 2(j) of the
contract act, which renders a contract which ceases to be enforceable void.
what section 11(6a)contemplates is a contract, and is not
an agreement which can be treated as a contract.
now they go further when they use the word arbitration agreement.
the court says it is a contract.
this is despite the use of the word arbitration agreement in 11(6a).
in other words, contract must conform to section 7 of the act.
it must, also, needless to say, fulfil the requirements of contract act.
then lordship will come to 109, 382.
we may sum up.
an agreement which is unstamped or insufficiently stamped is not
enforceable, as long as it remains in the said condition.
such an instrument would be void as being, not enforceable see 2(g).
it would not in the said sense exist in law.
it can be validated by only the process contemplated
in section 33 and other provisions of the stamp act.
we find the expression validation used in the decision of the court
in hari om agarwal, which we shall refer to in greater detail later.
this necessarily means that the court would not view it as unenforceable.
as enforceable and therefore existing in law.
in the sense explained, it would not be
found as not void and therefore not invalid.
thus, in the context of the act, the stamp act and the
contract act, we are the view that the opinion of the court
in sms estates regarded in garware and so and so is correct.
then para 110 is important.
in fact i. few days before the judgment was
pronounced in this case, your lordship has clarified that .
doesn't deal with that issue. career institute.
i don't remember the name. career institute.
actually lordship never went into the stamp act.
your opening question itself is very clear.
now my lord please see para 110.
11(6a) cannot be understood as merely predicating for an arbitration existence agreement existing literally.
this means that the mere existence of an arbitration agreement for
all intents and purposes on the exterior, purporting to project a
contract duly executed main, certain situations be insufficient under section 11.
if for the reasons such as it being unstamped, when it is clearly
required to be stamped, then it cannot be said to be a case
where the arbitration exists or for it would be no existence in law.
while we agree, the court must be careful in selecting contracts
where an arbitration agreement which is produced is not to be
acted upon, for the reason it does not exist in law.
all we hold is that an arbitration agreement which is not,
unstamped does not exist, and an unstamped contract contained in an
arbitration agreement would not exist, as it has no existence in law.
now that is contrary to the stamp act and also contrary to the contract act.
and i'll take your lordship now to the provisions.
but before that, since the lordship is having this thing, the
page please see the excellent passage of mulla at page 102.
para 102 at page 380. para 102, pertinently my lord, may i read?
para 102 at page 380, pertinently we may in the 14th edition of the
indian contract at a specific relief act by pollock and mulla, note as follows.
unenforceable contracts: unenforceable contracts are valid in all respects, very important.
unenforceable contracts are valid in all respects, but
may not be sued upon by the parties.
enforceability is linked. when do you say a contract has to be enforced?
when one party does not perform as part
of its obligation, you have to get it enforced.
who will be the agency to enforce?
under our system, the judiciary's job is to enforce it.
it says that but may not be sued upon.
so if a contract or an agreement is
not stamped, it cannot be sued upon that's all.
but it is valid in all respects.
please see further my lord.
such disability may arise for want of registration or because the time prescribed filing
the suit has expired, or because the plaintiff firm has not been registered that
section 69 or the document or instrument does not bear the requisite stamp duty,
or because a lender of money does not possess a license under money lending laws.
now lordship of will kindly see what has been held by the learned
authors is the correct position and in my humble submission, what is said
in para 103, and 109 is contrary to these position of contract law.
and now let us go to the sections and i'll conclude.
we have to get the legal concepts of
what is void, what is unenforceable, very clear.
and that's why, from law college, we were
taught that you cannot use the word void contract.
it's an oxymoron. a contract may become void because of supervening circumstances.
it's only a void agreement.
and please come to section 2(g), 2(h), section 10, and section 23.
your lordship will come to the definition of contract act.
281. contract act is 81 volume 4-a.
may i read my lord? yes. your lordship must first come to 2(e).
'every promise and every set of promises forming
the consideration for each other is an agreement'.
then come to 2(f) 'promises which form the
consideration or part of each other are reciprocal promises'.
now 2(g) and 2(h) are critical.
'an agreement not enforceable by law is said to be void.
an agreement enforceable by law is a contract.' now lordship has
to see 2(h) and go straight away to section 10 and 23.
'those agreements which don't satisfy section 10 and section
23, come under 2(g), which are not enforceable by law'.
i'll repeat my lord. 2(h) must be read with 10 and 23.
and those agreements you said?
those agreements, which don't satisfy the parameters of 10 and 23
will be agreements not enforceable by law, and which are void.
now, please come to section 10.
this is the origin of the phrase that 'all
contracts are agreement, but all agreements are not contracts'.
now, please see section 10, 'what agreements are contracts?'.
see the marginal note, what agreements are contracts?
all agreements are contracts if they are made by free consent of parties
competent to contract for a lawful consideration and with a lawful object and not.
and are not hereby expressly declared to be void.
nothing herein contained shall affect any law enforced in india, and not
hereby expressly repeat by way which any contract is required to be
made in writing or in the presence of witnesses or any law relating.
your lordships may just note in margin this nothing
is refers to section 25 of the contract act.
promise to pay a time bar debt, agreements.
i'll come to 25. i'll just finished sequence.
please come to section 10. section.
section 10 basically says, 'free consent and when is consent not
free?' then your lordship goes to 15,16, 17,18 of the contract act.
15 is coercion, 15 is undue influence, 17 is fraud, 18 is misrepresentation.
if consent is vitiated by these four factors it
becomes voidable at the option of the agreed party.
so consent is free. parties competent to contract majority.
there must be a majority age.
then if it's a company, it cannot be ultra vires.
the objects clause. for a lawful consideration, lawful object that takes us to section 23.
and i just mentioned not expressly declared to be void.
not hereby expressed. hereby mean, in this act.
in this act. yes.
now, your lordship will kindly come to section 23, which is at page 286.
may i read my lord? 23. what consideration.
the consideration or object of an agreement is lawful unless it is forbidden
by law is of such a nature if permitted, to defeat the provisions
of any law is fraudulent, involves or implies injury to any person, property,
or one another, or the court regarded as immoral or opposed to public policy.
in each of these cases, the consideration or
object of an agreement is said to be unlawful.
every agreement of which the object of consideration is unlawful, is void.
and my humble submission, stamp is never the object or consideration of an agreement.
stamp is an incidental part.
object is what is what we call parties are ad idem.
consideration is in 2d of the contractor, when at
the desire of a promisor, the promisee, etc. as follows.
so my humble submission is now taking the contract act with the
stamp act, reading 2(g) with 10 and 23, even if an instrument
is not stamped, it is not void under the provisions of the
contract act but it becomes unenforceable in view of the stamp act.
yes. as my friend points out, it is not even voidable.
now lordship will kindly come to 24 just to complete what they say
if any part of a single consideration for one or more objects or
any one part of several considered single object unlawful, the agreement is void.
so you can't apply severability there.
just like the one drop of poison which spoils the milk.
now come to section 28 at page 288.
exception 1.
28(a), every agreement, by which any party, thereto is restricted absolutely from enforcing his
rights under or in any in respect of any contract, by the usual legal
proceedings in the ordinary tribunals, or which limits the time within which he may
thus enforce his right, or which extinguishes the rights of any party thereto, or
discharges any party from enforcing liability under on respect of any contract on the
expiry for specified period, so as to restrict any
party from enforcing his right is void to that extent.
so basically, if you say you shall not approach the court, or
you can't approach the court after a particular period, then that is void.
exception 1 is important. 2).
this section shall not render illegal, a contract by which two or more persons
agree that any dispute which may arise between them in respect of any subject
or class of subjects, shall be referred to arbitration, and that only the amount
awarded in such arbitration shall be recoverable in respect of the dispute so referred.
exception 2, nor shall this section render illegal any contract in writing
by which two or more persons agree to refer to arbitration, any
question between them which has already arisen or affect any provision of
any law in force for the time being as references to arbitration.
now, lordships will kindly note, very, very important.
the agreement between two parties that they shall refer the dispute is a contract.
28 does not require that that contract should be stamped.
it can be oral. now come to 2(g).
an agreement not enforceable by law is said to be void.
so stamping really is not part of submission?
it is not part of submission.
and most important, section 23, because the court
says, if you don't stamp it non-existing in law.
no. and i'm submitting that the existence of
an agreement has nothing to do with voidness.
an agreement may exist.
all that happens is, it's unenforceable for what the majority, in my humble submissions
here is did they say that which is not stamped is void and unenforceable.
they say that both voidness and enforceability are synonymous.
what para 108 says, the lordship kindly comes para 103.
our view in this regard that voidness is
conflated with unenforceability receives fortification at page 103, italics.380.
that's very important because this goes far beyond the realm of stamp law.
a bench of five judges, when it holds this.
it affects every other agreement, even beyond the stamp act.
they'll say, look, this is article 141 if you don't stamp it, it is void.
and it may not be, i may not be only bothered about
the arbitration, i cannot enforce it in a proper civil court also.
we are concerned with arbitration.
what they say is my agreement is not stamped it is void.
and one more thing, there is an inherent contradiction.
there's no question of resurrection.
what they say if it is void, then where is the
question of it springing back to life after stamp duty is paid.
and it's still gone. still gone, it's gone, it's not like the doctrine of eclipse.
i was just going to say justice kk mathew.
yes, bhikaji narain dhakras, that once the eclipse is removed,
it assumes force proprio vigore, all that is not there.
there's no resurrection. so my lord, the proper test of the law will be this.
i'll summarize my proposition to say that the contract act, the
validity of a contract is independent of the requirement of any stamping.
as mulla says, even an unstamped contract is valid
in all respects, but you can't sue upon it.
then my lord, the last point i'd like to make is that,
on this question of original and certified copy, para 137, 141.3 and 144.
page number? page number yes, para 132, 388.
37 is at page 388? 391. yes.
starts at 132. my lord the heading is interesting at page 87.
amicus springs a surprise. that is mr. banerjee, my lord.
i don't know what he's going to do in this bench.
suddenly googly ball by mr. banerjee.
now my lord, my humble submission is at page 131.
para. 131, at page 388. i'll read my lord.
this court pointed out the existence of the scheme, prepared by the supreme court in
excise of powers under 111(10), para 2(a) of the scheme inter alia reads as follows.
submission of request: the request of the chief justice under sub section 4,
or sub section 5 of sub section 6, shall be made in writing
and shall be accompanied by the original arbitration agreement, or a duly certified copy thereof.
thereafter, when the curtains were about to be wrung down by the hearing, on
the hearing, the learned amicus brought the following aspect to the notice of the court.
he pointed out that under the scheme, the applicant
need produce only the certified copy of the arbitration agreement.
he would draw support from the judgments of jupudi kesava versus pulavarthi venkata subbarao,
and hari om agarwal to contend that even applying sections 33 and 35 by
the court at the stage of section 11, the certified copy cannot be impounded.
he thus sought to take the wind out of the sail
of the appellant's contention, by continuing most of the cases, since
certified copies alone are being filed and they cannot be impounded.
and as reference to the arbitrator based on certified copy, the
arbitrator is competent under section 33 and 35 to do the needful.
this court may bear this aspect in mind.
thereupon shri gagan sanghi would point out that even the
certified copy, the factum of payment must be entered this .
my lord, my humble submission is please come to para 137.
yes 391. i'll read 137 and 141.3.
137 - 'the submission appears to be that the scheme provides for a
certified copy of the arbitration agreement and the arbitration agreement is part of
the contract, which is neither which is either not stamped or insufficiently stamped
and since it cannot be impounded under section 33, cannot be validated. all
that the court has to look into is whether the arbitration agreement exists'.
what it meant is whether the arbitration agreement duly stamped, exists.
what that ultimately mean, though they don't say so in so many words.
141 is the interplay of evidence, para 141
interplay of evidence act, stamp act and registration act.
then they conclude this.
my submission is this, as far as certified copy
is concerned this supreme court scheme is pre 2015.
after 2015, when i make an application under section 11(6a) that
is rules can't be contrary to the act, my humble submission
is the registry will be bound to receive the application because
the court's jurisdiction is only to see the existence of the arbitration agreement.
so there's no. and suppose it's exchange of letters.
suppose it.
of course, letter also.the proviso says any one letter
can be stamped, but suppose it is electronic, telecommunications.
what do you do?
after 2015, you said when the application under section 11(6a) is filed.
the registry.? there's no need to produce the original or certified copy.
i can just file a copy, any copy it need not be certified.
it can be a true copy but so you're.
my datar, your propounding then is that, only a in the petition should be made.
with a copy of the agreement if it is there.
or suppose if its agreement is there.
the reason why they don't ask for the original
is because it may be with the other side.
with the bank or something else. obviously, to certify copy is always been.
whether it's high court, it's been always the act
does not say certified copy or anything like that.
so it leaves it as a matter of procedure.
so this is the reason why the rules.
several high courts also the rules provide you have to give the certified form.
many high courts don't provide that also.
many high court in fact.
no, we have been insisting in delhi high court also that
when we were there, that the certified copy should be there.
sometimes it's there in the parent contract like
in general conditions of contract, there is a provision.
yes your lordships. my learned friend did some research.
delhi, karnataka, orissa, mp, gujarat don't require either the original or certified copy.
but now my submission 11(6a).
the jurisdiction is so limited, i can tender my
agreement and say this is a copy of the agreement.
it need not be certified. it need not be original.
probably, what i could make out from this judgment
is, they've said, certified copy refers to public documents.
yes. certified copies is a public documents.
no. what they say certified copy or true copy is,
the xerox copy must show that stamp has been paid.
what was argued was the xerox copy will show stamping.
but then they have not overruled hari om aggrawal and.
no, no. they have not, they have not.
my only submission is 11(6a) must be given a full play.
and now there is no need to get into original, certified copy and so on.
because holding that would have meant the whole case
law, which has been build up over the years.
yes, that would have again not necessary also.
so i'll just conclude because.
just apropos what both my learned friend and colleagues said
we can title this proceeding as in re: the interplay
between the indian stamp act and the arbitration and conciliation act, 1996'.
or in re: section 11(6a) of the arbitration act, but 11(6a) will become very broad.
we are considering the stamp issue. very well.
i was about to ask because i've dealt with 11(6a).
i have finished.
if your lordship wants me to just read briefly on
the impact of stamp act qua section 8 and section 9.
i'll make my submission. then i'll finish my lord.
then refer, say the interplay between an arbitration agreement and the stamp act.
because for institutions 11(6a) would not even arrive.
my lord, it'll be interplay arbitration agreement, stamp act and contract.
arbitration agreements under the arbitration and conciliation act 1996 and the indian stamp act.
1899, and the contract act. contract act is an argument.
okay. very well.
should i deal with section 8 and 9 for five
minutes after lunch, or shall i leave it at the moment?
because we're doing 11(6a) per se. it's important, because in the 20.
all right, then i will deal with in ten minutes.
we'll consider whether to expand the angle.
we are now almost wrapping up so just 5 minutes.
and this side we request today end of the day is a deadline.
we discussed among ourselves at lunch.
initially my brief was to confine to 11 (6a), but to save time, i
think jayant mehta and nikhil will deal with section 8 and 9 and stamp act.
they can argue. thank you very much.
very grateful for a patient hearing to all your lordship's time.
i'm going to make three or four submissions.
the first of it is and i'll straight away formulate it
my lord without wasting much time because lordship knows the background.
the first it my lord is that the arbitration agreement.
just one second.
my lord, my first submission is that the
arbitration agreement is not chargeable to stamp duty.
because the original question, which was referred to the five judges, if
my lord just has a look at the original question that was
referred to the five judges and that is at page 293 of volume 5(a).
which i submit was the correct question.
page 293, volume 5(a), which my lord, i submit was the correct issue.
paragraph 58. we consider. may i read it?
yes.
we considered appropriate to refer the following issue to
the authoritative settled by a constitution bench of five judges.
whether the statutory bar contained in 35 of the stamp act applicable to
instruments chargeable to stamp duty under section 3 read with the schedule of
the act would also render the arbitration agreement contained in any such instrument
which is not chargeable to payment of stamp duty as being non-existent, unenforceable or invalid.
pending payment of stamp duty on the substantive contract instrument.
this was my lord the original.
what sense does these words mr. sakhardande which
is not chargeable to the payment of stamp duty.
does that postulate that an arbitration agreement is not chargeable to stamp duty?
yes my lord, that would be my submission.
and what happened before the five judges is.
did they. reformulate. i want to. reformulated the question?
on the basis of a concession made.
the reformulated question if i may just pose for
your lordship's consideration, is at 352 of volume 5(a).
and i will just make three short propositions
on why it is not chargeable to stamp duty.
page 352, volume 5(a) is the reformulated question based
on the concession by the amicus, learned amicus curiae.
paragraph 32 my lord. may i read it?
in view of the submission made by the learner amicus curiae,
the court in nn global was an error in proceeding on
the basis that the arbitration agreement would not be exigible to stamp duty.
the very premise of the order of reference would stand removed.
the reformulated question sums the words which is not chargeable to payment
of stamp duty, and words unenforceable or invalid would therefore be as follows.
whether the statutory bar contained in 35 of the stamp act
applicable to instruments chargeable to stamp duty under 3, read with
the schedule would also render the arbitration agreement contained in such
an instrument as being non-existent pending payment of stamp duty on the substantive.
it's a correct reformulation of the question, for the reason that the
words which is not chargeable to payment to stamp duty is a hypothesis.
so if you begin with the hypothesis that it is not
chargeable because payment of stamp duty, then what are you deciding?
so what they decided? they just deleted that part, which was a premise.
the premise was which is not chargeable to stamp duty.
which, my lord, in my respectful submission, was the correct premise.
it was the correct premise for this reason.
it can't be a premise. it's a question, it has to be answered.
but so far as my lord, today the question is.
the question is reframed as a question of law.
yes, sir. and that is the question of law which is sought to be answered.
we'll have to proceed on the premise of that question of law.
but if the correctness of the judgment is now
under review by a bench of a larger bench.
you want us to reformulate the question of law itself in the same sense.
i don't want your lordships to reformulate.
but if the basis of this judgment is that it is chargeable to stamp duty.
no, it is not. that's not the basis of the judgment.
but the basis of the earlier question was
that it is not chargeable to stamp duty.
which is correct. but that's an argument.
that's an argument. that's an argument.
probably our only contention is the question of law was as
framed was, if the parent contract underlying contract is not properly
stamped, will it affect the arbitration laws contained in that contract?
that may be your contention, same answer but much bigger.
so far as an arbitration agreement is concerned now, after applying the doctrine
of separability, they have my lord, separated the arbitration agreement and may not
said that under article 5 residuary clause, it is now taxable under the residuary clause.
now, my submission for your lordship's consideration on chargeability is that
when you are applying the doctrine of separability to a stamping.
mr. sakhardande, how did the issue of chargeability arise at all?
the question was the state in a proceeding under section 11(6a).
does the court go into a question of whether the agreement is stamped or otherwise?
that is the issue not whether arbitration agreements are per
se, subject to stamp duty or not clearly did not
arise, and it may depend upon the nature of the underlying contract.
but even then, even so, as a proposition of law.
suppose the underlying contract is an agreement to sell immovable property and
together with, i am just throwing you an example, possession is delivered.
now, as a matter of fact, i know in the bombay stamp act, the
maharashtra stamp act, it is treated for stamp duty as it were a sale agreement.
yes.
so it will depend very much on what facts are before you in that case.
i'm not saying that the main contract need not be stamped or should be stamped.
that can be gone into an e. but
should be go into it here, before seven?
that would be required for this reason that if i'm in a position to convince
your lordship, that an arbitration agreement which is made chargeable to stamp duty is based
on a legal fiction which doesn't apply because it's based on the doctrine of separability.
the doctrine of separability was evolved for the purposes of saving an arbitration agreement.
if that fiction is something which was created for that purpose, namely the arbitration act.
it will apply to the stamp act also.
it would not apply to the stamp act
because it will not have an extended application.
now, if not, that legal fiction for which this legal
fiction was incorporated in section 16, namely, the arbitration act.
if that fiction has to be restricted for the purpose for which it was
created the stretching of that fiction to something outside the purpose is not permissible.
so the consequence would be then, that the arbitration agreement
should be treated as an integral part of the original contract.
correct. now after that. it is in your submission.
in your submission. in my submission. correct.
now, my lord, if that is so, so let us then
say that it comes under one document with an arbitration agreement.
then my lord, the provisions of section 5 of
the stamp act would apply, for the purposes of stamping.
for the purposes of stamping the agreement, the arbitration agreement, not the main contract.
now when we go to.
no but, once you treat the arbitration agreement as not severable, and an integral
part of the main contract, then the entirety of the contract has to be stamped?
but my lord, therefore, therefore, that so far as that part is concerned, the
arbitration agreement would also have to be stamped provided it is a distinct matter
under section 5 of the stamp act, not of the arbitration, of the stamp act.
now, would your lordship just have a look at section 5.
may i just show to your lordships first,
the constitution bench my lord, paragraph 88 to 90.
which is why i'm.
if your lordships sees paragraph 88 to 90, page 374, paragraph, volume 5(a), paragraph 89.
a perusal. may i read my lords?
yes. a perusal of paragraph 29 would show.
my lords 88, if your lordships doesn't mind.
'as far as the finding in paragraph 28 nn global that the decision in
sms does not lay down the correct law when it holds in an arbitration
agreement in an unstamped commercial contract cannot be acted upon or is rendered unenforceable,
we are of the view that a finding in nn global does not appear
to be correct. a perusal of para 29 would show that the court in
nn global proceeded on the basis of the arbitration agreement being an independent contract,
is not chargeable to payment of stamp duty, and it would not invalidate the
arbitration clause or render it unenforceable, since it had an independent existence of its
own, cannot hold good in view of the admitted position before us that an
arbitration agreement in its own right is exigible to stamp duty. now my lord,
para 90. 'the whole premise of the court in nn global being that the
arbitration agreement not being exigible to duty, and it's having a separate existence, a
commercial contract in which the arbitration agreement is contained, being
unstamped, would not impact the arbitration agreement cannot hold good.
the reasoning in nn global in para 32 for disapproving of garware, in paragraph
22 thereof, that the arbitration clause would be non-existent in law and unenforceable till
the stamp duty is adjudicated and paid on the substantive contract is again on
the premise that the arbitration agreement, is a separate agreement under the stamp act,
which is not exigible to stamp duty, which
we have found is not the case in law.
now, my issue my lord is, 'separate agreement under the stamp act',
is something where the legal fiction my lord of separability, which is
to be confined only for the purposes of the arbitration act has
been applied to the stamp act and therefore my lord, the arbitration
agreement has been made 'stamp-able', which my lord, in my respectful submission is not permissible.
now my lord, if your lordships now turn to the stamp act for a minute.
so, this is the first reason why my lord,
the arbitration agreement is not subject to stamp act.
the second reason my lord, would be if you're on the reading
of section 5, if my lord just has a look at section 5.
i'm arguing this today before your lordship, because the premise of the constitution
bench that the arbitration agreement is stampable is in my respectful submission, erroneous.
now, if my lord turns to section 5, which is at page 338,
volume 4(a) and then i will come straight away to the decisions on this.
any instrument comprising or relating to several distinct matters shall be chargeable
with aggregate amount of duties with such separate instruments, each comprising or
relating to one of such matters, would be chargeable under this act.
now in order to fall within the expression 'distinct matters'.
so you have to cumulate the stamp duty.
that's what this. you would have to cumulate the stamp duty.
but provided it is a distinct matter.
now, in my respectful submission, first of all, an arbitration agreement
would not be a distinct matter because the doctrine of separability
does not apply to arbitration agreements when it comes to stamping.
the legal fiction cannot be extended.
the second reason is that an arbitration agreement being ancillary to the main agreement.
why do we have to get into this at all?
because the entire the genesis of the dispute was
whether in a 11(6a) application, you can look at.
whether it has examined, whether the documents have been properly stamped or otherwise.
should the power of impounding be exercised by the judge in 11(6a) stage.
now for us to go into whether an arbitration agreement is at all stamp-able.
you are saying it can never be stamped.
we don't have facts.
we don't have.for a bench of seven to decide this question would be very, very.
not this aspect, but other aspects.
we are concerned with 11(6a) here, which is
the appointment of arbitrators by a court ?
but there's a vast body of appointment that
takes place by individuals outside of a court.
every matter doesn't come under section 11.
secondly, increasingly that is, institutional arbitration. institutions have to appoint.
again, they are not courts under 11(6a).
it is perhaps necessary if your lordships to clarify that position as well.
not on the lines my learned friend is arguing.
i disagree with what he is arguing but it is
necessary to set out the principles that all these matters have.
have to be decide by the arbitrator.
there we are with you mr. khambata that we have to decide
that issue, that what we say in relation to a court for
11(6a) application you say would apply when an institution is appointing an arbitrator.
or an individual. that's right.
for the delhi international arbitration centre, when they.when
somebody moves the viac, you don't go into stamping.
that will be decided according to you by the arbitrator.
obviously though the three judge bench has said that the
indian stamp act applies, i put it in my submissions.
i'm not going to labour it. actually, the indian stamp act does not apply.
it's the state acts that will apply with their residuary powers.
but that's really them to arrive before your lordships
but i have put it there only for clarity.
indian stamp act won't apply at all because under entry 91 of list one the
remit of what parliament can do to fix rates of stamp duty is very limited.
in fact the residuary power is with the states.
so the indian stamp act doesn't apply at all.
i think i'll leave it at that.
i think i'll leave it at that.
stamp litigation and the states in on the local stamp act.
my lord i'll also leave it at that.
normally on arbitration agreements as residuary arbitration is 100 rupees.
under the indian stamp act it is 4 annas.
that's a different issue. maybe subject to stamp act.
that's right. the minority my lord .
as an agreement, if there is a separate
enactment, separate entry, it will be subject to that.
whatever the state act will provide. whatever the state act will provide.
and many have residuary clauses. maybe because they are applying to the agreement.
you are right.
as mr. khambata said, in 391 of the union list, which is what
the indian stamp act is referable to says, in the book, page 472.
rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes, bills
of lading, letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer of shares, debentures, proxies and receipts.
that's the only remit of the indian stamp act.
now see entry 63 of list 2, page 476.
rates of stamp duty in respect of documents other
than those specified in the provisions of list 1.
the residuary powers are with the states.
and your lordships have held so in the rama sharma case.
i have cited that in my submission.
i have briefly placed that for your lordships.
i think what we'll do is, i think i'll leave it at that.
i won't labour this point anymore.
what do we do for the finding of the majority then?
that's the reason. . both say it is chargeable.
of the schedule. of the? of the schedule to the stamp act.
no. section 5 may not apply.
section 5 when there is some other contract, because section
5 applies if they are separate transactions in one document.
in one document. it doesn't apply otherwise.
it doesn't apply mainly because subject matter is connected with something.
i will address my lords briefly on that.
no leave it at that. we'll examine it.
i was suggesting to leave it to the facts of each case on whether.
that will be different from.
the minority whereby the minority also says this
it's 291, 292, 295 of justice rastogi's opinion.
and 312, 412, 415. minority?
my lord, minority comprises of two independent opinions of justice rastogi and justice roy.
my lord, justice rastogi's opinion is to be found in paragraphs
292 and 295, which would be pdf 436 of volume 5-a
and justice roy's opinion, lordships may kindly note paragraphs 312, 412 and 415.
312 is at 442, 412 is at 478 and 415 is at 479.
and 312 is at page?
312 my lord is at 442, where they say that it's actually the court in
nn global 1 lost sight of article 5 to the schedule of the stamp act.
what does that say?
that contains a residuary entry saying that any other agreement
not provided for will be subject to the stamp duty.
that is the residuary article under which it is made .
the presumption in the question as framed that it is not stamp-able is not correct.
if not otherwise provided for. that's right.
and it says 8 annas.
the majority in five judge bench, goes by consideration of article 5.
minority also takes article 5 into consideration to say nn global 1
was wrongly decided on that account, but holds otherwise on the mechanism.
mechanism. no my lords, i was. maybe in some cases it may not be taxable.
there it's not executed. section 3 of the stamp act.
section 3 of the stamp act. in all cases it is not as facts.
that's right.
if it is not executable, if it is not being executed
because only on execution of the instrument that the stamp duty is.
even section 3. section 3 says certain instruments are not chargeable to stamp duty.
so i was suggesting my lord, if your lordships could say,
consider saying that so far as the stamp ability of an
arbitration agreement is concerned, would depend upon the facts of each case.
facts of each case, and that's why my
lord it should be relegated to the tribunal.
now my lords the submission is at page 29
of volume 1 where your lordship will find that.
my lords, the next point is. short point.
is that nothing can be said to be.
of course, this has been made my lords
by mr. datar, so i won't repeat it.
but something which is rectifiable and curable, it's a temporary affliction.
that's covered. that is at page 12 of me of my note.
then my lord, the issue of section 5 of the arbitration
act also has my lord been argued that it's a notwithstanding .
i've taken up also in my submission, the point of complete
code, that an arbitration act is a complete code by itself,
and therefore there is no question of the stamp act coming in.
just give me a minute my lord.
part two, but part one can't be worse off than
part two, because part two is on the basis of this.
so my lord, that would be my.
thank you mr. sakhardande. mr. jayant.
your lordships would find my written note of submissions in volume 1 at page 30.
i'll be briefer than mr. sakhardande my lords.
much of the canvas has already been painted.
i do not wish to repeat any of the.
volume 1, page 30 right?
30, but i have in my note referred
to the paragraphs of the majority and the minority.
whenever my lords need any assistance, can be taken from there.
i'm not reading or reiterating them.
the point that i wanted to make my lord,
are the following and i'll try and elaborate it.
the reason why we take exception to the formulation of the mechanism in
which the stamp duty is to be collected, in the opinion of the
majority of nn global 2 my lord are following; not only does it
not, in that classic sense, and please don't take me wrong my lord on this.
in the classic sense that it really relegates us to a
position where, for want of a horseshoe nail the kingdom is lost.
in the sense my lord, it compromises on all timelines of the arbitration
act contains and gives us namely my lords, if your lordships will look
at 11 sub-section 13, where it states my lord, within 30 days of
the notice served to the other side, my lord, the section 11 petition
is to be decided, section 9 contains a timeline of 90 days and so on.
my lord, all of this, is a time bound mechanism.
that's one.
and i will leave at that because this is an obvious point and i do
not wish to carry coals to newcastle, because it is going to my lord delay.
and another reason for which my lord we said is going
to delay is that under the stamp act, we have no
mechanism of ensuring that it is in a time bound manner.
your lordships realize that so in garware, your lordships directed my lord the stamp
authorities to ensure that the stamping takes place in a period of 45 days.
we have no data whether the stamp authorities really respected that, but
now given the manner in which one of the revenue authorities function,
it is very likely that they did not observe that 45 day window.
as a result of which my lord, making section 11 petitions hostage to my
lord an undefined timeline under the stamp act and over which the section 11
court would have no jurisdiction because a section 11 judge cannot direct the revenue
authority to do it in a time bound
manner or in a certain period of time.
why?
very often you may find that section 11 judge is not the same
court as the court which would have territorial jurisdiction over the revenue authorities.
take, for example, seat and venue. suppose my lord, an arbitration.
an agreement is executed in delhi, but has its seat of
arbitration in bombay, the bombay high court can't grant can't issue
directions to the revenue authorities in the state of delhi and likewise.
so you could have a situation where you
have an uncontrolled timeline consuming an entire process.
in other words for want of a horseshoe nail, you have the kingdom getting lost.
that's the point number one.
the second point that we have for us is consideration is
that this formulation also runs afoul of the larger public policy principle.
the larger public policy principle that your lordships have seen in various legislations is
that my lord, entertainability of a petition is not made subject to a fiscal precondition.
i hope i'm able to communicate myself.
entertainability of a petition is not made subject to a fiscal
precondition, except in situations where the legislature wants that to happen.
and more often than not those situations are in the instances of appeals.
i have in my written submissions, given examples.
and if i may very, very quickly without taking lordships through those
provisions, if i may invite your attention, my lords to paragraph 2.4.1.
just kindly of see that at page 33 of my written submissions.
mr. mehta, the broad proposition may be very difficult to accept.
no, i'm just taking a leaf out of that.
i am not saying. yes, you can treat it as an argument to support.
that's right. that's the highest that i can put it.
not as a. no, of course not.
i cannot say that as a blanket rule, but my lord i am giving
instances wherever the legislature found that there has to be a fiscal mandatory precondition.
and for this, i assume that an arbitration agreement may be subject to stamp duty.
but even then, section 11 contains no such formulation.
and wherever the legislature wanted that fiscal preconditions to be
imposed, lordships would find that in those instances in 2.4.1
my lord, we have collated all of these in volume 4-c.
volume 4-c. you are referring to central excise act, sarfaesi.
that's right and your lordships would invariably find that those legislations
use the word shall not be entertained, shall not be admitted.
so wherever the legislature failed that there has to be a fiscal mandatory inviolable
inexcuseable precondition, the formulation is to be found in words like shall not be
entertained, shall not be admitted, and so on,
none of which are found in section 11.
not even found in 9. not even found in 8, and not found in 45.
so the formula, say in the customs act,
the central excise act, and sarfaesi as well.
and all of these formulations apply to an appellate stage
when there has already been an adjudication at the first instance.
there is a finding of certain payments due and collectible, and then the preconditions imposed.
none of them provide at the first instance.
and therefore it is not to say because your lordships are counterbalancing the two acts.
it's really a question as to whether the stamp act should take
precedence over the mechanism under section 11, or would your lordships leave
the collection and adjudication of stamping and the duty to the arbitral tribunal.
it's a choice lot between two competing legislations and both of which are exhaustive courts.
stamp act is an exhaustive court, and so is an arbitration.
both are consolidating acts my lord.
so therefore, in our respectful submission the formulation by the majority
falls foul of this principle, that where the legislature and this
is also furthered in some sense, by section 36 of the stamp act.
your lordships saw that mr. datar in his own usual illustrious way
placed before your lordships section 36 of the stamp act, which says
once it is admitted into evidence, it will not be gone into.
so legislature, while we are making a fiscal statute itself was cognizant
that you can have some instruments flipping through the siege of evidence.
and then there's no question of putting the clock
back, going back on the admissibility of that instrument.
that's why neither section 33 nor section 35 invalidates an instrument.
they only say it will not be received in evidence.
but and section 36 says once it has been received
in evidence, there's no question of unscrambling the scrambled egg.
the third aspect in our respectful submission as to why my lord, the majority's
view needs to be recalibrated, is not that, the majority leaves ms. trivedi pointed
out my lord, section 9, the majority does
not go into para 169 of the judgment.
majority says we are not going into section 9.
now, my lord, in our respectful submission that is neither here nor
there for the simple reason an argument that is, i'm sure what
would be made before your lordship, that section 9 should have a different taste.
there is nothing in section 9 which gives any
guidance to that argument or which supports that argument.
you cannot have a situation where for the purpose of section 11, you have a
formulation of stamp duty first, entertainability later for purposes of section 9, a different regime.
so what? this is going to snowball?
no. without a doubt not into a section 9 situation.
this aspect of my lord, first collect the stamp duty, get
the certificate under 42 and then my lord entertain the petition
with time my lord, i'm sure will snowball into petitions of section 9.
section 9 as your lordships have defined in numerous
cases is our measure that are, by definition urgent.
if something is void, then section 9 will also come in.
i'm so deeply obliged for the question.
it is an agreement can be void only within
the four corners of the of the contract act.
the stamp act does not invalidate a contract.
it only says it shall not be acted
upon or would not be admissible in evidence.
it does not invalidate, and therefore even for the purpose of section
9 my lords, the test of 11, with greatest of respect whether
it is 8 which says prima facie, 45 which is now brought
at par with 8, says prima facie the same test would have to be applied.
and your lordships have in vidya drolia held that the
test for the purposes of 8 and 11, are synonymous.
it's the same test that applied to 8 and 11.
your lordships may kindly note the paragraphs which are in vidya drolia.
those are 144, 145 147.5 in vidya drolia my lord.
144, 145, 147.5. i will give the page numbers also my lord.
kindly bear with me for a moment.
your lordships would find my lords, 144 at pdf 189, 145 at pdf 190.
147.5 at 191 of volume 5-a.
now my lord, that brings me to another point within this the second argument that
i have that the larger public policy is to not treat the fiscal requirement as
secondary, but surely not something that precludes any party or any person approaching the court.
now, please have with me, unfortunately that is in another volume.
please have with me section 149 of cpc.
149 of cpc. your lordships, would find that in volume 4-a at page 727.
volume 4a page? 727 my lords, pdf 727.
volume 4a, page 727.
if a person is not a party to an arbitration agreement, a
suit would be the normal, usual remedy in a commercial matter, answering
the description of a commercial relationship in terms of the arbitration act.
if there is no arbitration agreement, a suit could be the remedy.
for a suit, my lord the court fees would have to be paid.
please see how cpc deals with payment of court fees my lord, 149.
and kindly see the language.
where the whole or any part of any fee, prescribed for any document
by the law, for the time being enforced relating to court fees has
not been paid, the court may, in its discretion at any stage, allow
the person by whom such fees is payable to pay the whole or
part, as the case may be of such court fee, and upon such
payment, the document in respect to which fee is payable shall have the
same force and effect as if such fee had been paid in the first instance.
my lord, a plaintiff moving the court under 149 seeks leave of
the court to say, well, for reasons a, b and c, please direct.
please allow me some time to pay the court fees.
that does not preclude my lord, entertaining the suit, that does
not preclude my lord, the suit court from granting an interim relief.
so can we have an interpretation of the arbitration agreement
my lord, which puts a plaintiff in a civil suit
in a better position than a petitioner under the arbitration act?
yet again, what your lordships find, is a legislature saying
there is a pre-condition, but it is not an inviolable pre-condition.
we have ways and means of ensuring that my lord, in a given
situation, ends of justice are met, while the fees can be collected later.
we also have in the cpc, order 20, and by the
1976 amendment to the cpc, 6(a) was brought into the cpc.
order 20, rule 6a.
kindly have that my lord, your lordships would
find that at 793 in the same volume.
volume 4(a). i seek your lordships attention to sub-rule 2 of rule 6(a).
'an appeal may be preferred against the decree. i'm sorry my lordships have it?
'an appeal may be preferred against the decree without filing a copy of the decree.
and in such a case, the copy made available to the party by the court
shall, for the purposes of rule 1 of order 41 be treated as a decree.
but as soon as the decree is drawn, the judgment shall cease to have effect
of a decree for the purpose of execution or for any for other purpose.' once
again my lord, a decree would have to be stamped, would have to be drawn.
but the legislature said, you don't have to wait for expedition.
for ends of justice, you can always have the
decree being drawn in parallel, but the execution proceeds.
we're not waiting.
the legislature is telling us, please don't wait for a decree
to be drawn, which would require stamping and proceed for execution.
but yet again, another instance of the fiscal
precondition my lord for drawing of a decree.
many mr. mehta, many such examples are there.
we are concerned with a very narrow compass.
why are you getting into other issues?
yes my lord, i'm just giving you examples where my lord the
legislature has itself told us that a fiscal pre-condition is not such.
we are really confined now to interpreting this statute.
i'm not interpreting.
my only purpose was to support my argument with order 22, rule 6a.
mr. mehta, we've looked at your other submissions.
thank you. i'm most grateful my lord, for a very patient hearing.
thank you. deeply obliged. yes, mr. banerji.
and mr. khambata, we just wanted to know, i mean, it's entirely your choice.
would mr. khambata like to argue first because
as the amicus you can wrap up what.
unless you have all decided in advance who's going to.
give me half an hour my lord, most of it
is covered in the written submission, so i'm not going to.
alright, mr. banerji, you complete so that.
my lord, there is obviously a sense of deja vu here
my lords, having argued this at some length before five judges.
and you are not springing any surprises on us i hope.
i am my lord, i'm coming to the surprise in a minute.
this is the second time that there has been a seven judge bench in an
arbitration matter and the earlier one was in this very court in 2005 in sbp.
the reason i'm mentioning this is, that both matters concern an apparently
innocuous provision of the law, which is appointment of an arbitrator, which
is usually only to be brought in when the parties fail to
appoint somebody or the institution fails, or there is some stop gap
required where the court has to step in, really just to make an appointment.
yet such a matter has come before this court on two occasions before seven judges.
my lord why is a question that perhaps my lord will require
a long debate but i will show your lordships a little bit
of the history of article 11, which is relevant only to the
question before my lord, which is, it's a very narrow reference before my lords.
section 11, should the section 11 court go into stamping?
that's the only question, which your lordships have to
see, or should it be left to the arbitrator?
obviously the canvas is wide.
the problem is that while answering such an issue, every sentence that your
lordships utter in these seven judges will have an impact on section 11.
that's the reality of the matter.
we have lived with sbp for 18 or 20 years.
and even after the 2015 amendment sbp, the ghost continues.
it was relied on in garware, which is squarely before my lord.
and there is a very important passage in
justice roy's judgment, where he deals with sbp.
that's one aspect of the matter.
so far as the narrow question is concerned on 11(6a), elaborate arguments have been made.
i will.
i have in my index, set out a structure as to how your
lordships can look at section 11 and the consequences of stamping that it is.
obviously the agreement is valid and not void.
this is a matter only of admissibility.
all that has been argued.
i will show a few pages of items which may have been missed, that's all.
but before i do that, i'll just take two
minutes more of indulgence because it's a mindset issue.
judges normally, as i understand, i don't have any personal experience.
whenever a matter comes before a judge, there is an inclination to decide.
if there is injustice and injustice presents itself, and
somehow there is an issue, the judge will decide.
the entire purpose of 11 is somehow to impose self-restraint in not deciding.
there is a lakshman rekha.
if your lordship sees the language of 11(6a),
the word used is confined to the examination.
there is a lakshman rekha. there is a very limited scope in which the court.
my lord a section 11 court is really.
and i said this before. it's really not a court.
in fact, your lordship earlier would decide section 11 with a single judge.
that was the practice in this court.
that was the practice in the high court.
it would all be decided by a learned single judge.
and in fact, there was a judgment of justice bharucha,
as your lordships will remember of five judges in konkan.
chief justice bharucha as he then was, which said that really
all you need to see is whether the procedure has been
followed and appoint and that of course will not find favour in sbp.
so the practicality of deciding something in a court in some
way defeats section 11, the way the two acts are placed.
we have grown up with the 1940 act.
the 1940 act has a provision in section 20 where you appoint an arbitrator with
intervention of the court, your lordships may remember long time ago this section was there.
there the thinking was at the very first instance, the court will intervene
and the court will decide what is the scope of the reference and
all points would be decided at the section 20 stage and go on.
the '96 act is a complete about turn. nobody is saying. this is something which
haunts judges; nobody is saying that the court will not have the final say. the
court has to have the final say. the last word, supervisory jurisdiction has to be
with the court. arbitrators cannot be allowed to run riot. but lord, we are not
at the last stage. we are at the first stage, at the appointment stage. so
who has the first look, and who has the second look? what has happened here
is, instead of the first look being with the arbitrator at the section 16 or
article 16 stage, slowly and slowly 11 jurisdiction is being slowly and slowly my lord
increased. and the burden is immediately coming on the court. and the whole purpose was
that the burden should not come on the court. any matter your lordships take of
11, whether stamping or otherwise, your lordships will issue notice. somebody will file a reply.
they will say limitation. they will say this that. lot of court time my lord
is taken and the entire purpose of taking it out of the system on day
one, which the institutions do. they appoint. it goes out. 16, you have your first
shot. 34, you have your second shot, and ultimately, the court decides. so please keep
this larger picture in mind, because every sentence your lordship will see on section 11(6a)
will have some impact my lord, broadly. every sentence, not only in restamping. this i
wanted to make this submission at the first instance. now, in this slide, i will
just show the index to my written submissions and only show a few aspects that
your lordships may consider. please come to the written submissions. the written submissions start at
page 45 of the first volume. have my lords got the index? i've just put
it in a structure, and most of these arguments my lord, have already been made.
four or five aspects i just want to highlight.
first is the introduction. how did the reference come about.
what were the findings in nn global?
what is the relevant issue framed? then, what are the summary of the submissions?
i'll place them at the end, then the stamp act,
the relevant provisions, which mr. datar had mentioned, the relevant authorities.
now my lord, here hindustan steel was mentioned.
there are some very interesting judgments my lord,
privy council, high court and the supreme court.
i will come back to that.
then my lord section c is stamp act versus the indian contract act.
that also has been addressed in some detail, 2(g),
2(h), 2(j), what i would submit are the errors.
then my lord, (iv), international perspective. i want to develop this.
i want to show my lord, what is the basis
of this article and how it directly impacts this stamping case?
then my lord, arbitration and conciliation act at page 46.
what is the history? what are the relevant paragraphs of the 246 law report?
what did the high level committee say?
and then some judgments, and then (vi), i have focused on garware
and united india hyundai because that has been specifically affirmed by the
constitution bench in paragraph 29 and vidya drolia actually, now it has been clarified.
and i have mentioned it in my written submission
in career institute, that really the question was not there.
your lordship will see that one page before i go back on my note.
lordship just sees the career institute reference.
please come to page 108 of the written submissions.
how long are your written submissions?
my lord, i thought that it is better to put everything down
so that since we are pressed for time i have put everything
down in writing so that it is there rather than only giving pointers.
please come to 107. i mentioned careers institute educational society.
this judgment my lord, this order came one day before vidya drolia.
had this come perhaps my lord, there would not have been any
need to debate vidya drolia to great length sorry in nn global.
this order had not come.
then the judgment was delivered one day later and it has
the scope of vidya drolia has been explained in career institute.
i am therefore not going to really touch upon vidya drolia today.
i want to just show my lord's garware, because nobody has
yet your lordships have not seen garware, which is the sheet
anchor decision on the basis of which the five judge my lord proceeds.
so if your lordships are pleased to just see garware.
my lord, garware is at page 33, volume 5-a.
5-a?
my lord, garware is absolutely on the point where this
court holds, that at the section 11 stage stamping is required.
that is my lord, the two judge bench.
my lord, the reasoning in garware, your lordships will just
note the paragraphs, paragraphs 18 to 22 and 29 in garware.
8 to 14 is the history. 18 to 22 and?
. and 29 my lords.
these are very important if your lordship, starts with paragraph 8 to 14.
i just. that starts at page 46.
8 to 14 summarize the previous history.
konkan, rani, sbp and then quote the law commission etc. and the bill.
and it summarizes everything in one place my learned senior mr.
datar referred to paragraph 13, which has the statement and objects
and reasons, but in one place my lord, everything has been summarized.
8 to 14. the reasoning starts at paragraph 18, which is at page 54.
18 to 22 is the heart of the reasoning.
it will be noticed from the aforesaid judgment that where an
arbitration clause is contained in an agreement or a conveyance, different
consequences ensue, depending on whether the agreement or conveyance is unregistered or unstamped.
then the next sentence.
'it is settled. again my lord, sbp comes back in the picture. 'it is
settled by sbp and co. that section 16 of the '96 act has full
play only after the arbitral tribunal is constituted without intervention of court under 11.
my lord, this is harking back to the previous regime of intervention in court,
intervention of the court, intervention without the court. my lord, this finding at paragraph
18 proceeds on the basis that sbp is good law. that moment something is
decided in 11, the 16 jurisdiction, which is really the wider jurisdiction of existence,
validity, jurisdiction is curtailed because a court, and no court my lord, the chief
justice or it's designate, because that was sbp,
has decided something in a mini trial finally.
so, how dare an arbitrator go behind a
section 11 order in a section 16 situation.
that is the impact of the quote of paragraph 12 which is quoted
in some detail here and my lord that quotation of sbp, which is
relied on by the two judges at page 54, if your lordships come
to 55 somewhere in the middle my lord, 'prima facie., your lordships have this? 'prima.
, this is relevant because of my lord, 'the model law commentary'.
'prima facie, it would be difficult to say, that in spite of the finality
conferred under sub-section 7 of section 11, to such a decision of the chief
justice, the arbitral tribunal can still go behind that decision and rule on its
own jurisdiction or on the existence of an arbitration clause. so my lord, what
sbp says is, because 11(7) says the decision of chief justice is final, 16
jurisdiction is curtailed, 11 binds the 16. now my lord, that is the basis
on which if your lordships sees, at the next paragraph 22. the finding on
this aspect. sorry, please come to page 56. in view of the law laid
down by the seven judge bench, it is difficult to accede to the argument
made by the learned counsel on behalf of the respondent, that section 16 makes
it clear that an arbitration agreement has an independent existence of its own, must
be applied while deciding an application under section 11. so the 16 argument that
all issues should go to the arbitrator is rejected in view of sbp, this
is first find. second finding, 19 the finding is the law commission has not
specifically referred to my lord sms, but it has overruled. it has legislatively overruled
sbp. then 20, then 22 is the second error, which is the para which
has been confirmed by the division bench.constitution bench. please come to para 57. page
57. when an arbitration agreement is contained in a contract, it is significant that
the agreement only becomes a contract if it is enforceable by law. no difficulty.
we have seen how under the stamp act, an agreement does not become a
contract, namely, that it is not enforceable in law unless it is duly stamped.
now this is the error which has been compounded by the constitution bench. therefore,
on a plain reading of so and so and section 2(h) of the act,
2(h) is set out above, which is 2(g) and 2(h) have been set out.
would make it clear arbitration would not exist where it is not enforceable by
law. this is the second error and the third error is at 29, where hyundai
comes in. that's the third aspect your lordships may consider which is at page 62.
running page 62.
here, the division bench relies on hyundai to
say this was a scott and avery clause case.
i'll just read it. the judgment in hyundai is important.
what was specifically under consideration was an arbitration clause, which
would get activated only if an insurer admits or accepts liability.
since on facts it is found insurer repudiated the same, though
an arbitration agreement it exists, so to speak in the policy,
it would not exist in law, as was held in that judgment.
when one important fact is introduced, namely, insurer has not admitted or accepted liability.
so my lord, this is the understanding of hyundai.
there's a problem with hyundai because hyundai is.
there are difficulties which i've highlighted in my note.
the clause is intact.
it is just that the scope is limited to quantum and not liability.
we can't say that the. hyundai is accepted.
it says an accepted matter to the.
so there's a problem with hyundai also.
likewise in the facts of the. just one minute.
so my lords in fact what happened in hyundai, i put it
in my note is, the learned single judge of the madras high
court, she appointed an arbitrator saying that this should go to arbitration.
this honourable court my lord following a pre-11(6a) judgment
held that no, there was no dispute as to.
there was a dispute as to liability.
hence the matter should rest here. and the 11 was dismissed.
so again, the problem there is that, so
i have dealt with that in my written submission.
on the basis of hyundai, which is now affirmed by
the five judges, and justice roy takes the opposite view.
on the basis of hyundai, this is the
third part of the ratio of this judgment.
likewise, in the facts of the present case, it is clear that the arbitration
clause that is contained in the subcontract would not exist as a matter of law.
to summarize on garware, my lord, 3 points on garware, one
my lord, it resurrects sbp to curtail the section 16 jurisdiction.
it resurrects sbp my lord.
section 16 jurisdiction is curtailed basis sbp and relying on section 11(7).
this is one. two, my lord, it.
and that is a point which has been developed in great detail by mr. datar.
two. it holds a non-stamped agreement to be non-existent in law.
and three my lord, it relies on hyundai, which itself
has its own problems because it was an accepted matter case.
it was a three judge bench and there were there
are issues with that judgement, and i have spelt it out.
just to decide hyundai, your lordships, there had to be numerous
hearings first in the madras high court, then it came here.
then that was heard.
so, my lord, this is exactly what is what is
the entire idea is to take it out of the
court at the first instance and push it to the arbitrator.
and of course, my lord ultimately supervise at the 16 /30.
so my lord, this is so far as garware is concerned.
hyundai i have said whatever i have to say.
i will now go to just two pages
on this issue of existence in law and stamping.
and then the foreign jurisprudence, which has not been shown.
and then i'll sum up.
two pages in the written submissions your lordships, will see and something quite interesting.
please come to page 61. 59.
this is following on from what mr. datar has already argued in respect of
the contract act what is the intersection of the contract act and the stamp act.
your lordships at page 59, hindustan steel my lord, that has already been mentioned.
then at the bottom of 59, there is a mention
of the privy council which affirms the patna high court.
page 59 of the written submission. have your lordships got 59?
volume 1, titled relevant authorities my lords.
first, there is hindustan steel, which was mentioned in the morning, then my lord,
at the bottom of page 59, is the privy council in the patna high
court judgment which my lord i have quoted, 'object of the stamp act is
not to alter the terms of the bargain between the parties, protect the revenue
by excluding proof of the bargain.' this is so far as this is concerned.
then, at page 60, my lord, there are a series of
judgments which consider the stamp act in some detail in the
context of validity and out of these judgments, the second one gulzarilal marwari.
all these judgments were considered by justice roy in
his dissent, noted in the majority but not considered.
gulzarilal marwari is important because what the judge there
finds is that in england there are provisions which make.
where non-stamping actually makes an agreement void, unlike in india.
so my lord, he gives that example in gulzarilal marwari.
then poorna chandra chakrabarti, justice bijan mukherjea's judgment, and then my
lord, the most interesting one which is the bottom of page 60.
the pakistan. pakistan.
now my lord, it is very elaborate, but i will not read the judgment.
he goes into the legislative history of section 33
and 35 from the 1890s and sets it out.
but my lord, i am not on the judgment so much as the judge.
the person who delivered this judgment was a parsi judge called dorab patel.
he was destined to be the. he was their h. r. khanna.
he was destined to be chief justice of pakistan.
when zia-ul-haq came to power, he was asked to take an oath of office.
he refused and he resigned. so he could not become chief justice of pakistan.
in the bhutto reference three dissents.
one of his main dissent was authored by dorab patel.
so very learned man. barrister. he analyses in great detail the interplay.
this case what had happened was, there was an insurance contract.
in that insurance contract, which was unstamped, the matter went to an award.
the award was sought to be enforced.
the argument was made that look, the initial document is unstamped.
it is void. he said that cannot be the law.
that is a valid document.
and there are some very interesting passages, some purple prose if i can put
it, where he uses very my lord colourful language, and he analyses this and
your lordships would certainly read this judgment if only for that, and for the background.
so my lord, the consistent position in all high courts
in the privy council, everywhere else is, the fact that
mere payment of stamp duty my lord does not invalidate the bargain.
in fact, the way he puts it is, 'the object of the legislature was
to protect public revenue and not to interfere with commercial life by invalidating instruments
vital to the smooth flow of trade and commerce. and then he said it
would be against all canons of construction to enlarge the meaning of the words
in 35 so as to render invalid, instruments which fall within the mischief. so
my lords if the majority view in nn global is to be sustained by
this court today, forget arbitration, anybody can turn around and say at any point
that this agreement is void, this agreement is
invalid. i won't do anything, whatever benefit i've got.
in fact my lord, we had also cited before the five
judges, a privy council judgment, which explains that if you take
this sort of extreme view, then there will be all sorts
of practical difficulties and mr. datar mentioned the quotation my lord from mulla.
we had also cited my lord, the 13th law commission, where this problem was addressed.
i'll just show my lord that passage from the 13th
law commission, which is mentioned in the note itself presided
over by mr. setalvad, where he deals with this particular issue specifically.
your lordships will just see page 64 of the written submissions.
64 refers to mahan singh, which is the
privy council, and then, please see page 65.
this very question was raised about unenforceability.
this very question of stamping and unenforceability was
raised and shot down and the law was summarized.
my lord at page 65. all these documents followed are on record.
we've given the volume and the page where it is there.
the above judgment was relied upon by the law commission in its
13th report, chaired by m. c. setalvad specific context of an unstamped
agreement while dealing with a recommendation as regards section 2(g) as follows.
director of legal studies has also made the suggestion it should be provided
in section 2(g) that agreements of imperfect obligations are not void, but only unenforceable.
he has mentioned an unstamped agreement as an instance of such a case.
such an instrument, which is a record of an agreement, is neither receivable
in evidence nor can be acted upon see section 35 of stamp act.
since the decision of the privy council in mahan singh versus yubabi, which
i quoted there, the law is well established that the expression unenforceable by
law, which is what is in 2(g), does not mean unenforceable by reason
of some procedural regulation law of limitation, but unenforceable by reason of substantive law.
in view of this, it is unnecessary to introduce the suggested change.
so 2(g) is restricted to unenforceable by law which as is explained is void.
so my lord if agreement is void, null
and void, that stands on a completely separate footing.
we are not going into existence or validity here.
we are on admissibility. so this is so far as this aspect is concerned.
in this background, i would like your lordships now, just before
i come to the summary of my submissions, to just see
the model law and the commentary because that has some impact on this.
so the model law, article 11 of the model law was basically incorporated
by us in section 11 and your lordships will recollect, i mentioned it
a little earlier that sbp seems to suggest in the majority and is
disagreed by justice thakkar in the minority, that because 11(7) says a decision
by the chief justice is final that means
nobody else can look at it in 16.
the intention, actually in the model law was exactly the opposite.
this expression final and no appeal has been explained.
my lord there are two commentaries on the model law, which are of relevance.
one is a book by peter binder.
we have put the extract.
peter binder very conveniently, collects all the foreign law on each of the articles.
and there is a second book by holtzmann and neuhaus,
which we have put also extremely convenient, because the entire
discussion as to the travaux is set out in holtzmann and neuhaus.
i know my learned friend, mr. george pothan has individually
set out the entirety, but these two books actually summarize
the entirety, and i will just show four pages of that.
where is that? where have you referred to these two?
the first one if your lordships see peter binder,
peter binder is in volume 4-b at page 4393.
i hope i got that right. serial number 7, volume 4-b.
4393. interestingly my lord, today i'm citing the fourth edition.
the second edition was cited in sbp, but not noted.
4393. has your lordships got 4393?
international commercial arbitration and mediation in uncitral modern law jurisdiction.
in fact your lordships will find there is not much case law because
nobody other than us has a problem in appointing arbitrators and there's a reason.
have your lordships got 4393? 4394 is where the model law is set out.
please see article 11(5) because this will become relevant later.
a decision on a matter entrusted by paragraph 3 or 4 of this article to
the court or other authority specified in article 6 shall be subject to no appeal.
this is where we get our finality provision from.
the court or other authority in appointing that shall have due regard to qualification.
so, this is the source of our 11(7) of finality.
now, why did this come is made clear if your lordships
go down a few pages to 4398, it starts at 4397.
default procedure. 4398. paragraph 6. two very interesting sentences at the bottom of 4398.
the finality of a courts or other authorities decision in this
case is essential to the rapid constitution of the arbitral tribunal
as was pointed out by the analytical commentary, i'll show the analytical commentary.
the next sentence is even more interesting.
it is suggested that this provision does not infringe on the procedural
rights of the parties because the possibility of applying for setting aside
of the award, according to article 34(2)(a)(iv) of the model law remains open.
so finality, the purpose of finality is really to make
sure that the procedure starts, because the arbitration should start.
but then, of course, the court has the right.
paragraph which i was reading my lord, please see the act.
your lordships are very familiar with the act.
my lord, in 8 there is an appeal.
section 8, there is an appeal. in 9, there's an appeal.
in 17 there's an appeal. even in 16, there's a part-appeal.
in 34 there's an appeal. in 45 there is an appeal.
only in section 11, is it that there is
a specific no-appeal and the reason is for this reason.
every other. because in every other situation the court is a court.
in an 8 your lordships will have to apply mind as
to whether it is a suit which has to be stayed.
what are the prima facie grounds, et cetera.
9 is interim relief. there has to be some prima facie case.
16, jurisdiction. if it is allowed, there is an appeal.
34-application of mind. 45 there are some grounds.
but 11 the statute says, 11(7) of our
statute says no appeal and the reason is this.
finality is in the context that you get the cart rolling.
so that 16, there is a lacuna in our statute
that in the model law there was an appeal from 16.
the reason why there is no other jurisprudence of any consequence abroad.
and my lord, i'll show that is because all
these issues stamping, this, that everything goes to 16.
there's a straight appeal to 16 before the 34.
so you don't have to suffer the whole arbitration.
but that's my lord a legislative lacuna which may perhaps be addressed.
so this is the passage here.
finality is essential to the rapid constitution and then there's a footnote.
the footnote refers to the analytical commentary which i will show.
and the suggestion by peter binder is the reason that this does
not fall foul of party's rights is because you have a later challenge.
justice thakkar, in his dissent, uses the phrase chronological priority.
my lord uses the 1st look and 2nd look.
first look with the tribunal, final second definitive look with the court.
nobody's running away for that. so this is one passage i want to show.
the second one is the.
my lord in this if your lord goes, on e more page at 4399.
cases clout. so all the cases under the clout system, article 11.
and there is not much law, because this is really not debated.
this is not a problem.
this is a problem peculiar to our act and our jurisprudence.
those cases are there. please leave that.
please come now to the relevant portion of the travaux preparatories the model law.
please come first to page 4363. same bundle.
4362 is the title. everything is in one place.
a guide to the uncitral model law on international commercial arbitration, legislative history and commentary.
howard holtzmann and joseph neuhaus. this in the next page gives the article.
i don't want to read the entire thing, but it is essentially a default clause.
it's a stop gap. please come to 4386.
seventh secretariat note analytical commentary on draft x a/cn.9/264, 25th march '85. this has
been separately annexed also, but it is here, and in this would your lordships
come to para 7, which is at page 4387. this is what is quoted.
rules and guidelines are decision of court. paragraph five. according to paragraph 5, the
decision of the court shall be final whether it relates to a matter entrusted
to it by the court by the suppletive rules of paragraph 3, or by
the mandatory provision of paragraph 4. in cases where an agreed appointment procedure fails
to secure the appointment. finality seems appropriate. these are the words which again take
us back. in view of the administrative nature of the function and essential in
view of the need to constitute the arbitral tribunal as soon as possible. as
you said to get the cart going. this is to get so. the entire
purpose of article 11 was only appointment of arbitrator and leave everything else by
and large to the 16 jurisdiction. so this is the international. this is the
basis on which we have our 11(7), which uses final and no appeal. same
my lord, the same portion is used in 11(7). so this is something that
your lordships may keep in mind because in garware, the two judge bench specifically
refers to that portion of sbp, and on that basis curtail 60 and says
that 11 has a wider play. so my lord, it squarely applies. and this
aspect has been dealt with by justice roy in his dissent in four paragraphs,
which i will show my lord, and then i will just summarize my submissions
in my lord, two pages. your lordship just may just see the dissent of
justice roy on this aspect. your lords may come to page 492 of volume
5-a. your lordships will just give me a minute. yes. my lordship,
may come to page 458. 458 or part of. 458 of justice roy's.
paragraph or page number? page number. volume 5-a.
my lord. 5a? 5a. 457 he is discussing sbp and 458 my lord.
he starts discussing the dissent at para 353 and he
gives my lord, he summarizes justice thakkar's dissent at 354.
firstly, the function of the court is to interpret the provisions as
it is and not to amend, alter or substitute the interpretive process.
secondly, it's for the legislature to make a law applicable to
certain situations contemplated by judiciary is no power entering into legislative wisdom.
thirdly, as held by me, the decision of the chief justice
is merely a prima facie decision and subsection 1 of section
16 confers express power on the tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction.
fourthly, it provides a remedy to deal with situations,
create created by the order passed by the arbitral tribunal.
emphasis in original.
then what sheet anchor of his decision is in
the guise of interpreting statute, judicial legislation, not permissible.
and then 355.
he then considers section 16 in some detail,
and then 356 is the conclusion in the dissent.
the above line of reasoning in thakkar j's dissent resonates with
the internationally recognized principle of competence, competence, and the doctrine of
separability majority opinion spb suggests section 11 could conduct a mini
trial at the prereferral stage, which is where my lord we are heading again.
jurisprudential correctness for sbp has been doubted and was considered as excessive judicial intervention.
it has been legislatively overruled by subsequent amendment.
so my lord, he finds sbp is gone and there are number of observations thereafter.
the majority still and the concurring jurisdiction of justice ravi kumar still relies on sbp.
garware, still relies on sbp.
that ghost is still there because my lord we feel or
judges feel that where there is some injustice, even at the
11 stage there is an inherent desire to correct the wrong.
but in correcting that wrong what the balance is that that
wrong could equally perhaps be corrected by somebody else without taking up.
today, seven judges are sitting on an arbitration matter which really
should be somewhere else, before somebody else, deciding a 16 on stamping.
so my lord, that was the that was what the dissent specifically affirms.
so my lords, these aspects your lordships may keep in
mind while laying down the parameters of 11 in its
totality, and in particular, 11(6a), which is the language is absolutely clear.
nothing .
in the majority judgment in the five judges,
there is no place where 11(6a) is quoted.
confined to the examination of the existence of the agreement, each
word has been paraphrased analysed in great detail by justice roy.
that expression, that provision, is not quoted in the majority at all.
so my lord, whether on the text or the context, admissibility
issues at least should not be touched at the 11 stage.
now, my lord, in that light, i just want to conclude by reading or
placing two pages of the written submissions, which summarize whatever my lord there is.
it is summarized at various places.
your lordships will come to page 54 of the volume 1, written submissions.
it's just two pages my lords, i'll just place it.
54 in volume 1.
the majority view in nn global, the unstamped agreement is void, does
not exist in law, does not lay down the correct law, such
a view is conflict of provision of stamp act, set of jurisprudence.
in so concluding majority judgment failed to deal with the several
authorities cited before it, including all these authorities, which i mentioned,
stating that an unstamped agreement does not render it invalid or void.
then my lord, two is, it is a fiscal enactment.
it is not a weapon of technicality.
three my lord, i have taken from the judgment of the supreme court of pakistan.
object is to protect public revenue, not to interfere with commercial life
by invalidating instruments vital to the smooth flow of trade and commerce.
four my lord, it's a curable defect, merely prescribed document from being admitted into evidence.
five my lord, again, does not affect the
validity of the transaction, merely renders the document inadmissible.
six my lord is important.
parties which have acted upon contracts substantially perform their obligations under such
contracts insufficiently stamped to be visited with severe, drastic and unduly harsh consequences.
if an unstamped agreement is deemed to be
not existing in law and ought to be void.
particularly true in cases original agreement is not traceable.
then my lord, seven is widening of the scope of arbitration agreements.
then page 55, 11(6a) language, confined to the examination of
the existence, investigations aspect stamping, contrary to the plain language.
contrary also to the statement of objects and
reasons which says, 'please don't go into other issues.
' then word 'confined' has a specific meaning my lord.
this was quoted by justice roy in his judgment that it's a lakshman rekha.
you have a limit.
then my lord, what i have submitted is 'existence' has a specific meaning.
should be restricted to existence and validity at the highest of the arbitration clause.
validity would mean arbitration agreement, not null and void.
it should be restricted to formal validity at stage of contract formation.
inquiry should only be to satisfy agreement in writing for
contractual ingredients fulfilled and in any eventuality, by no means
should it be extended to whether document is inadmissible as being unstamped.
'inadmissibility' and 'invalidity' my lord, whichever way we look at it, are different legal concepts.
lack of stamping is admissibility.
and then my lord i've mentioned 2015 amendment and it is not
turning a blind eye because my lord the arbitrator can look at it.
and 16, even if your lordships under 11 appoint an
arbitrator, the section is clear, 33 and 35, make it clear.
arbitrator is an authority under 33. he can look at it.
he is looking at it my lord, in all institutional
arbitrations, in all other ad-hoc arbitrations, where there is consent.
as an arbitrator, i have also been confronted
on the first day with an unstamped agreement.
one has to sort it out in whichever way possible.
and my lords, ultimately, there are a lot of two or three judge benches.
sometimes it is difficult to reconcile them, but
your lordships have the luxury of sitting in seven.
and if there are some portions that can be ironed out, i
would request my lord, this is an opportunity, after 18 years my lord.
it is not often that one gets a chance to raise
an arbitration issue before a forum and every sentence of my
lords in the context of appointment of arbitrator will have some impact.
it may be that 2019 amendment may be notified.
it has not been notified as yet.
there is some rethinking on some aspects.
ultimately, whatever your lordships say will have an impact not only.
and i'm making.
and i think i can make bold to say, not only on
the stamping aspect, it may have some impact on other section 11s.
and i conclude by my lord, mentioning a judgment of my
lords, which shows that there are 11s pending from 2006, 2010,
2012, and the reality is it is really like a mini trial.
you file the application, other side comes.
he files a reply, you file a rejoinder.
then there is a full-fledged hearing in the high court.
then there is an slp. then your lordships sometimes.
and the reality is that.
and we made this calculation, maybe in eight
or ten matters, my lords have closed the 11.
in the vast majority of matter their appointment
has been made and the matter has gone on.
so it is also a question of balancing judicial time and the
legislative intent and keeping it out of the system at the first instance.
nobody is saying it will not come back.
everything somehow at the 34 stage or somewhere
may come back, but that's the larger issue.
my lords, i am deeply obliged. thank you mr. banerji.
yes mr. khambata.
i thought my learned friend would leave me 45
minutes, but he seems to have left me 5 minutes.
but mr. khambata, we can give you a little time tomorrow.
lordships are kind enough for that. i will, of course not repeat anything.
and i want to also place before your lordships a perspective not only under section
11, but also private appointments of arbitrators and institutional appointments because i think, as my
learned friends have said, seven judges do not sit often to hear an arbitration matter.
it's best that these matters are also ironed out by your lordships because otherwise other
matters will float up the stream to your lordship subsequently, there's no point in that.
your lordships are fully seized of all the issues.
it's best that your lordships lay down the law emphatically now.
i think justice khanna actually encapsulated the issue
before my lords when all is said and done.
and i believe justice khanna said whether non-stamping or under stamping
of the main contract can render the arbitration agreement void or invalid.
that's really the heart of this debate and i would request
my lords to hear my arguments with one or two overarching thoughts.
the first thought is that ultimately, the stamp act is a means to
secure revenue for the state arising from the stream of trade and commerce.
the arbitration act assists the stream of trade and commerce.
and any roadblocks at the initial stages will only dry up that stream.
so to use stamp as a gateway dispute
to arbitration really defeats the purposes of both acts.
today we are talking about making india a global hub for arbitration.
and we have before us section 5 of the act,
which has already been shown to my lords, as well
as the fact that the arbitration act is a complete code.
and i think taking all these together, my lord i want
to first make give your lordships, three reasons why the issue
of stamp must be left to the tribunal in the first instance.
there is always a 34 court. there is always a second look.
and as my learned friend said the first
look should it be just a prima facie look?
should it be a look at all or
should it actually decide the matter at the outset.
now, there are three broad reasons why i comment, that your lordships purposively interpret the
provisions of this act to hold that the matter must be left to the tribunal.
the first, and i'll go through it very briefly because my lords
have expressed some view on that already, is the doctrine of separability.
i'm conscious of the fact that under section 16 that doctrine
is incorporated for the purpose of the tribunal deciding its own jurisdiction.
but it's not only under section 16, that
we find the doctrine of separability under our act.
we have it in black and white in section 7.
if my lords, just see section 7 for a moment.
7 sub-section 2 which draws the distinction between an arbitration agreement,
which may be in an arbitration clause and the main contract.
my lord may i continue tomorrow? half an hour to 45 minutes tomorrow?
i can complete. we'll be here at 10:30. we're grateful your lordships.
