item 701.
before my learned senior starts, there is a
small request, regarding the scope of the reference.
as your lordship have, now, broadly seen the papers.
the reference is whether article 30(1), the expression used 'establish and administer'
is disjunctive or otherwise, where this basha will have to be addressed.
but the written submissions which all of us have received
from the petitioner is as if azeez basha is being
reconsidered, as if this bench is sitting as an appellant bench.
i have my lord, in my written submissions narrated, only a minute.
if i may. my lord, a capacity of a
solicitor to interrupt and take the stage is legendary.
let us begin and he will answer.
and we will answer him. this is not on.
this is simply not on. if he has raised certain questions, we will answer that.
let dr. dhavan open, because once in about 20 minutes, we
will know that the ambit of his submissions is going to be.
then we will see as a matter of progress.
let dr. dhavan open. it is our request and we have decided to be decent.
we will be.
both individually on the issues, quite apart from
being disjunctive or conjunctive, that's one part of it.
but on the individual issues under article 30, whether aligarh muslim
university was administered or- let's read and as or - or established.
on both those issues, the court ruled to say that
it is neither administered by minorities or established by minorities.
that correctness of the finding has never been referred, has ever been referred.
that's all that we wanted to point out.
that will be your submission. that's all.
my lord, whether the reference is sustainable is an argument i'm going to make.
what is this my lord? i've never seen this in the supreme court.
we are a bench of 7, let dr. dhavan open his argument.
as the matter progresses we'll understand what is the
scope of the controversy, and then we will decide, where.
this is simply unfair. yes dr. dhavan, we will start.
in fact, it is fair. we know what is the scope.
one person goes on air, basha. the other person says the reference is not maintainable.
we will address these issues. you answer, you answer, and we will answer you all.
my only request, my lord, is this, there is
a certain slack we might require in your lordship's timing.
we appreciate, my lord, that this is the busiest court in the world.
you are overwhelmed in a way in which no court in the world is overwhelmed.
whether it's 136 or whatever it is.
the time that your lordship can give my lord, is very important, and i would
just say that in the light of what has been said, our reply is important.
in the 370 case, our reply was curtailed my lord.
if required your lordship, may give us time.
that's my respectful submission.
my lord, i remember j.l. sanghi was asked to curtail his arguments.
krishna iyer rang me up in the evening and
said - your item is number 1, please continue.
these are my lord, traditions and i know that the chief justice, and
i've commended it, is so patient in listening to arguments, it is admirable.
dr. dhavan we will. thank you. don't worry about the time.
ultimately, our conscience has to be satisfied that we have heard both sides fully.
right, right. and our reply.
the reason why we set down time limits
is, because then people have a broad indication.
my lord, i understand. there is no repetition.
your lordships are overwhelmed. now my lord, let me begin by saying about the reference.
i want to read the two reference orders to your lordships, because
the significant thing in the two reference orders is this, that normally
when a reference is made, the points of reference are itemized by your lordships.
this is not been done in this case.
so i've taken the liberty, my lord, in my written
submission of itemizing what draws from the two reference orders.
the first in '81 and the second in 2019. so, let
me take your lordships, straight away to those two particular orders.
because it's important, your lordship, should itemize what the point of reference is.
we get them in volume 3-a, right?
3-a, absolutely. show me both 209. i'm sorry.
i'm a luddite my lord. i'll have to use the printed text.
so much better now. one day, my lord, i will learn, that's a promise.
my lord, kindly turn to. i thought we could have started with this matter.
it should start with this matter. i'm learning, i'm learning.
i am. i appreciate this my lord.
and when i interact with my colleagues, they're brilliant
at this in a way in which we never were.
anyway, kindly turned to. what is it?
that's the pdf? 209.
look, this was what said by a bench presided over by justice fazl ali.
it says - 'after hearing the parties we are clearly of this opinion that
this case involves two substantial questions regarding the interpretation. (of article 30(1), the present
institution was founded in the year 1938 and registered under the societies act. in
1940, the documents relating to the time when the institution was founded shows that
while the institution was established mainly by the muslim community, but they were members
of the non-muslim community who also participated in the establishment process. the point that
arises is whether 30(1) of the constitution envisages the institution which is established alone
with the participation for the factom of establishment from any other community on this
point. there is no clear decision of this call there are some observations in
azeez basha, but these observations can be explained away. another point that arises is
whether the establishment of the institution it is registered as a society under the
slightly registration act. its status is a minority change) [end of no audio] an
institution changes in view of the broad principles laid down in azeez basha. even
several jurists including mr. seervai, have expressed the correctness of the decision of this
court. since the point has arisen, we think that it is proper, where a
larger bench can consider the aspects fully. we therefore direct that this case may
be placed before the hon’ble chief justice for being heard by a bench of
at least seven judges so that azeez basha may also be considered and the
points that arise directly to the essential conditions or ingredients of the minority institution,
may also be decided once and for all.' then a
reference is made to the various criticisms, which the court noted.
'a large number of jurists, including mr. seervai, learned counsel for the petitioner, mr.
garg and interveners, dixit and kaskar, have also stated the this case requires reconsideration.
in view of the urgency that this matter may be decided as early as
possible, we gave liberty to counsel to mention it before the chief justice.' so
here, my lord, is a clear statement, of course, that reference was not made eventually.
but we have now to consider the reference
that was made by my lord, chief justice gogoi.
your lordship may come to 216.
the point i'm going to make is there are so many things
mentioned in this reference that your lordships will have to formulate and
we will assist your lordship to formulate, what the points of reference really are.
maybe all these arguments - reference is bad
etc. can be looked at after the event.
now, 216 -'begins with azeez basha.
in our mind, it's clear that the community will have the right
to establish and administer of their choice, meaning thereby where a religious
minority establishes an educational institution, it will have the right to administer it.
an argument has been raised to the effect that even though the religious
minority may not have been established, it will still have the right to administer.
' when i get to azeez basha, my lord, i'll
read all of it, but kindly come to page 218.
it's a very interesting comment your lordships have made, which really, in
a sense takes us much further where in paragraph 2 it is
said -'the judgment of the allahabad high court, which is under challenge,
rejects the prayers made on account of the decision of azeez basha.
' this is the effect of a azeez basha, that
after 1968, it has quelled all understandings of article 30.
then a mention is made of anjuman-e-rahmania, which is the 1981 case,
and then your lordships will see in paragraph 4, it mentions t.m.a. pai.
what is the effect of t.m.a. pai?
it's crucial, my lord, in our understanding of what this is.
your lordships will then come to page 219, where a question was raised in
t. m. a. (pai and the question was never answered. now my lord kindly
turn to 220. the said facts will show that the correctness of the question
arising from the deficient of this court in azeez basha has remained undetermined now,
lord, the reference is made to yashpal this is extremely important. and i will
show that to your lordships. because azeez basha. says once there is an intervention
of statute then it is established through the statute, not by you.) now, yashpal
my lord, looking at the ugc act, which azeez basha refers to, but nevertheless.
ugc act, my lord.
now, what do we do with yashpal and then over the case
221 -'having regard to the background as stated above, when the precise
question was already referred to the seven judge bench, but not answered.
we are of the view that the present question set out above should be referred.
now, what is to be taken into account, my lord?
t.m.a. pai is to be taken into account, yashpal is to be taken in account.
yashpal, my lord, says that when you want to
establish a university, it has to be done by statute.
this is section 23 of the ugc act as well.
now, the point would be, it means that wherever there is the
establishment, by statute, you are not entitled, to be a minority institution.
this will affect a large number of institutions, my lord, in this country.
your lordship is a chancellor, my lord of.
i want to stress that point because i don't
think azeez basha has understood how universities are administered.
now, what do we do with the reference?
you can pop up and say whatever you like, but, we have
tried to make my lord, some sense out of what this is.
i've done it in a small paragraph, and
will your lordships come to my written submission?
my learned friend says that in 220, azeez
basha has to be reconsidered as mentioned twice.
this is there my lord in the reference, but unfortunately that bench
did not delineate what the questions are, which normally, my lord, happens.
now come to my written submission.
of course, the order, the referring order by chief justice gogoi, brother justice
khanna and justice nageswara rao, refers to the questions which were formulated in
justice fazl ali's original order, says as well those questions were never answered.
no, there were two questions which were formulated by justice fazl ali.
in fact, he began by saying - two questions arise.
he didn't formulate them as one and two, but it's obvious that
in the first page, the learned judge has formulated the two questions.
but the very fact that it refers to t.m.a pai
and yashpal has to be taken into account my lord.
it's as simple as that. now my lord, kindly.
these questions were formulated by justice fazl ali referring.
to some extent, to some extent.
but this court looked at the later decisions of this court.
the later developments which have taken place as well.
now my lord, kindly come to my written submissions.
this is volume 1-a. because you have the 2004 act which comes in.
then yashpal is. t.m.a pai tells us how do you define a minority.
t.m.a pai doesn’t deal with 'establish and administer', it
certainly has some bearing on the issue, because it does.
and its consequences. because your lordships are always concerned with the consequences of an interpretation.
kindly come my lord, to my written submission, that would be volume.?
1-a. kindly turn to page 7 where i've summarized.
i'm sorry. dr. dhavan? now after i. what i've read to your lordships.
i've dealt that. kindly come to page 8.
1.5.
to my mind, my lord, since yashpal and of course, there's a national minorities
act, my lord, which is very important, i have my lord, indicated what the
possible reference could be, and that your lordships
will find at the bottom of page 8.
may i read it my lord? yeah.
now at the bottom of 8, i've succinctly put what the reference should be.
'whether the decision in azeez basha is internally contradictory in its reasoning
on facts and law. contrary to the authoritative decisions of this court,
rendered nugatory by subsequent statutory changes, and contrary to the constitutional dispensation
from article 30. this covers my lord, the later portions and the
earlier portions.' now, here, my lord, i put the issues that arise from this.
the first is, was azeez basha correctly decided and whether
it suffers from internal contradiction and reasoning on facts and law?
this my lord, i will place azeez basha before your lordships.
'was. did azeez basha need to be considered in the light of earlier and
subsequent decisions of this court? what is the effect of azeez basha in the
future decisions of the allahabad high court, which applies azeez basha completely and strikes
down the statutory amendments through the 81 act.' my lord, when we went to
the allahabad high court, chief justice ray simply said, this problem of article 30
and azeez basha is by a bench, authoritative bench, we have to follow it.
there's nothing more we can do.
of course the judgment is piquant, but we are not
at present my lord, in appeal over the allahabad judgement.
i appreciate that my lord.
we can certainly place it before your lordship, but i don't think it's necessary.
maybe, that's in the light of your lordships decision, maybe
my lord, that can be done by the smaller bench.
now my lord 'what is the effect of the national commission of
institutions act read with the university grants commission. should azeez basha be
reconsidered in the light of the ncmi and read with ugc by
yashpal.' then my lord -'was azeez basha correct in accepting the antecedent
historical data on amu's muslim character, but denying its constitutional significance while
deciding the issue of its minority status, which
is at variance with st. stephen's, proost and patro.
my lord, and parts of it.
then, 'is azeez basha contrary to the constitutional dispensation?' my lord, that's the 6th point.
these are the issues that arise, and i've dealt with them in seriatim.
because we have to my lord, whether we like it
or not call a reference from the two reference orders.
now, my lord, i want to begin by saying before
i go into the preliminary objections that we want to raise.
my lord, i think your lordship, will bear in mind that india has
a diversity which is more than continents in any other country in the world.
your lordships, have listed in that.
they have listed only 22 languages, in the 8th schedule.
but in actual fact, they are much more.
as you go across even my state of up, you will see the variation
as it goes, and they want to preserve that language, too loom my lord.
that is the basis of t.m.a. pai.
therefore, your lordship, will bear in mind that this enormous task
before your lordships, which came about squarely places in talking of secularism.
and then there's this very elegant, elegant passage my lord,
at the end, very evocative my lord, but very important.
so, when your lordships, get into this question my lord, your lordship, is deciding
something that goes to the heart of indian secularism, and to the heart of
the diversity of this country, both in terms of language as well as religion.
this is so crucial to our understanding of the constitution.
of course, in 1920, there was no constitution.
but subsequent developments have taken place.
in 1950, a constitution comes, '56 the ugc act comes, the minority act comes,
and there's a load of decisions my lord, which say, look at the historical antecedent.
azeez basha looks at it and says, it's now irrelevant because we have decided
that the act, in fact established what happens to that rich history, my lord.
mr. sibal will also comment on it.
what happens to that rich history?
throughout the world my lord, there are minority state institutions.
your lordship, went to harvard. john harvard came from emmanuel college, my college.
and we still exchange with harvard.
if you look at america across the board, and if you look at india
today, private institutions and minority institutions are the heart and soul of indian education.
you can't deny it, my lord.
and that is why justice kripal says - 'so what
if they have read it? they don't lose the minority character.
' you can't withdraw recognition.
this is one of the points that is made in t.m.a. pai.
(now my lord, i come to a preliminary objection. kindly come to page
10 now this phenomenal. i'm just lagging for your lordships when they reply
to this. we will want to elaborate in reply the question that people
issue whether the union of india, having accepted and defended the minority status
of ali gardenu university, both as a matter of fact and law, can
be allowed to take a new stand that is contrary) to its pleadings
and affidavits in the present litigation, in the absence of any change in circumstance, annuity.
the union of india has always defended the statute.
in azeez basha, they defended the 1951 and '65 act. and when we
were in allahabad, and before this court, when your lordship gave a stay
order, the union of india took the view that azeez basha was wrongly
decided, the history should have been taken into account. and how can it
change its stance? how can, because of a regime change. how can my
lord, we say, that because of the regime
change, we change our stance. it can't be done.
i await the solicitor's response to all this.
and when that response comes, we will reply.
but just let me take you to one or two passages on page 10 onwards.
what the union of india does in 2.2 -'in view of the foregoing paras in
general, and particularly in view of the judgment of the supreme court in azeez basha.
the union of india has decided to withdraw its earliest stance taken
by the government to support the minority institutions status of aligarh muslim university.
the slp filed in the supreme court in 2006, in support
of the minority status of amu may accordingly be treated as withdrawn.
' now, of course, your lordship has to give permission for this, that has happened.
we've responded to this as well.
then your lordships will see, i've said the union of india's .
we have taken, 'the petitions have been opposed by the union of india,
and its main contention is that the aligarh university established in 1920 by
the amu act and that this establishment was not by the muslim minority.
but the government of india, by virtue of a statute, the '20 act,
and therefore the muslim minority could not claim any fundamental right to administer.
' so if you're not established, the question or administration doesn't apply.
sorry? yes, my lord, in azeez basha, they defended the statutes.
now there is a change of regime.
till 2005, they take the view that this is right.
mr. gopal subramanium appeared in the allahabad high court,
both for the attorney general as well as the government.
he came here, my lord, we came before your lordships, the stance in
the stay order, at which some stage i will show your lordships, was,
'no, azeez basha is wrong and the judgment of the allahabad high court
is wrong.' so your lordship said that as
far as the reservation is concerned, stop it.
and amu agreed.
but as far as the other things that you do,
i.e., within 25 miles of the kilometres of the mosque,
you will keep your minority institutions and muslim institutions at that.
then over the page and this i reserve for my right to reply.
i have given two decisions as to whether the
stance of the government can be changed or not.
and the decisions basically, say if there is a policy change, it's different.
but this is more fundamental, there's a constitution in place here.
and my lord.
it's idle to argue that before this (reference bench, this is not a contention.
between parties as the solicitor says it is my lord to bring to your
lordship's notice azeez basha. then over the page. my lord, i've given the union
of india's affidavit it says definition of university merely recognizes a new amendment of
81 that as the nucleus of the aligarh muslim university, which is a historical
fact. but amu and mao are not one and the same. i'll show to
you. your lordships. my lord the antecedent history the detailed negotiations) that took place.
now, there is some discomfiture in the select committee, which justice wanchoo points out.
but the select committee majority takes an entirely different view.
so, my lord, our view is that the union of india stance, is a defiance
of the parliament's recognition in 1981 that amu is indeed a minority institution, is contrary
to the pleadings and submissions made before the allahabad high court and this hon’ble court.
now, my lord, i need and remind your lordship of sanjeev coke,
which says that mere affidavits, my lord will not solve the problem.
then my lord, i sum up in 2.12, 'it is the duty
bound to defend and follow the will of parliament express to the
1981.' the union of india is not going to defend it having defended it.
when my lord, 'it failed to file a justifiable ground for reversing their consistent
stance, since 1981 at the governmental level and before the hon’ble court in the
allahabad high court. in these very proceedings, its failure to state that no any
new material or legal developments to justify this stance is arbitrary, reasonable and (lacks
bona fide. in any event the union of india can best be a supporting
respondent in these appeals and would be a stop from adopting a stance that
is contrary to its intent and purposes in the amending act of 1972. and,
of course, 19, it should say 1981. this my lord i'm flagging for your
lordship census let them apply and then we will rejoin because they have raised
some fundamental question so this is a preliminary
question.) i will now go to it on merits.
i'm starting with azeez basha.
but before that, my lord, may i take your lordship to article 30.
my lord, the heart and soul of secularism as far as minorities is concerned.
minority protection started in 1909, when reservation was
made, 1919, 1935 and, of course, our constitution.
now have a look at the importance of article 25 to 30.
this is the crux of the understanding of what has to be done
in this multi-diverse country, because take away the diversity, there are all kinds
of assimilations that are at present taking place in our country, but take
away this particular aspect and the entire colour of our constitution and governance changes.
now my lord kindly come to 25.
now, my lord 25 and 26 are important, and
azeez basha went slightly wrong in its understanding of 26.
in justice kripal's judgment of t.m.a. pai he says,
26 will also give you a right to establish institutions.
azeez basha says, since you're out in 30,
how can you have a right under 26.
now, my lord, there are two concepts of secularism, my lord, in our constitution.
the first comes from 25(2)(a), where it says -'regulating or restricting the economic,
financial, political or other secular activity, which may be associated with ritual practice.
' this is where secularism is mentioned and this is the negative
view of secularism, saying that these rights will be subject to secular.
this is a very narrow view.
the wider view that your lordships, have taken on secularism my lord, which is writ
large over your lordships decisions, is what we understand as part of the basic structure.
the narrow view my lord, simply says you can regulate this activity.
then my lord, if your lordships, i have taken you through the 26.
28(3), is important, because it mentions aid and that you cannot, because
of the aid that there are some limitations on what you can do.
this is now fully explained in t.m.a. pai and not fully explained in basha.
now my lord, kindly come to article 30.
i am not going into the controversies my lord, of 29 and 30.
that 29(1) is a limitation on 30.
all that has been decided, it's not.
now come to 1(a), we needn't bother about that my lord, but the main
provision of 30 - 'all minorities, whether based on religion or language' - this
is the diversity provision 'shall have the right to establish.' this is important, establish what?
'and administer educational institutions.' now, this has to
be read conjunctively and no doubt about that.
but one point that your lordship, should notice is this, what is a minority?
is something anterior to this.
'establish and administer' are the rights that flow from the recognition of a minority.
it's very important that your lordship should settle this.
what is it that makes a minority.
in my view, my lord, there are three questions.
firstly, the question of origin.
did the origin come from and where mother provincial effectively is in contrast.
mother provincial says it does not matter even if a
single financier comes in para 8 which i deal with.
that's enough.
all this azeez basha business of not ignoring the antecedent my lord, is wiped out.
the second question, my lord, is the question of nexus, where
mother provincial and other decisions take the view, that what you
have to look at is whether they found the institution or not.
and thirdly, my lord, is the numerical test in t.m.a. pai.
, kerala education did not answer that question.
we now know that the numerical test, is in respect to the state.
of course, some of us who argued pai
my lord, are not particularly happy with this.
because we support justice ruma pal decision, then
it depends on the nature of the statute.
but in any case, the majority is in this.
then over and above that, my lord, we have
to look at the intention of the statute in question.
what azeez basha does, my lord. and i'll take your lordship to the statue.
it ignores the purpose of the statute.
the purpose of the statute is writ large that it is of a muslim character.
whereas it goes into the question of establish and administer, it ignores the purpose altogether.
now, i'll briefly indicate to your lordships what my
broad argument on azeez basha is going to be.
my lord azeez basha is. i'm sorry.
my lord, it is always the wish of arguing
counsel to know what your lordships were whispering about.
nothing. it was some diversion, in a way connected with the matter.
of course, i realize. even more so.
even more so.
one thing that i didn't lord emphasize in
article 30, is the words 'of their choice'.
now, my lords, i'll briefly outline first what azeez
basha does and then take your lordships through the decision.
'of their choice' was introduced to indicate that you can
have a perfectly secular education being administered in a minority institution.
yes, of course.
therefore, we are not constrained to only propagating
your religion or your language or your culture.
you can have an engineering college. you can have an it college.
that was the purpose.
what your lordships have done, is added two caveats to this,
because there was a fear that these institutions will become too insular.
i think that's your lordship's point. we don't just talk about that.
what your lordships have done in sidhajbhai and in t.m.a. pai is,
your lordships have said that these institutions must be institutions of excellence.
that's very important. and amu and all these.
our understanding of the constitution is, you must,
whatever your minority character, must be institutions of excellence.
therefore the court has held that any regulation which promotes the
character of that institution as an institution of excellence is permissible.
of course. so therefore, you must pay minimum salaries to your professors.
if you don't, you will not be an institution of excellence.
the other caveat… frank anthony, for instance.
.
a lot of decisions is this, that where the ordinary
law applies, service law, electricity law, whatever it may be.
there's no immunity from the application.
there's no immunity from that, and i make it absolutely clear
that amu and the other institutions must be institutes of excellence.
it goes to the core of raising the level of minority institutions.
and your lordships have done this consistently on these two
points, institutions of excellence and ordinary law will apply to.
but the moment you say, recognition will not be
given to you t.m.a. pai says this is not all.
funding, affiliation, my lord, all that will be impediments.
i must say my lord, that in accreditation
amu has been given a+ in its excellence.
now my first point about azeez basha is
this, azeez basha says universities can be a minority.
this is at page 848. i'll take your lordships through it.
now universities can be a minority, and you say that if they
are established by statute, they have no protection, this is a contradiction.
because now my lord, as ever, universities can be established in only two ways.
royal charter, which doesn't apply, applies to high courts, but nobody else and statute.
section 23 of the ugc act, which is noted
by azeez basha says it must be by statute.
at the same time, it takes the view that if you are
statutorily established, then you are established by the statute and not your antecedents.
the second is azeez basha recognizes the background and antecedents
role that the mao college made in building this institution.
this does at page 849. i'll show to your lordships.
and it is said, it is clearly muslim.
the third point that i want to raise before your lordships, because i
want to take your lordships to the act of 1920 and of course,
the act of '81. it ignores completely the purposes of the act. so
all the provisions that actually deal with its muslim character are totally and
completely ignored. now my lords, there is one thing, and your lordships will
appreciate that, azeez basha does not wholly understand how universities are run. it
mentions the governor general, it mentions a rector. universities my lord have a
dual system. firstly, and your lordships will appreciate this as chancellor, and just
that you will supervise if necessary, you will inquire all that is written
my lord. for example, in section 7 of the
bangalore, it's there in nujs, it is there in sanchi.
so one of aspect my lord is the
external institutions, that are kind of suo moto ombudsman.
the second part is the statute itself in the institutions of the minority.
the emphasis in azeez basha that the rector has this enormous power, is unfounded.
in all universities, rector later became the visitor.
in all universities the chancellor, the rector or the visitor has this supervisory
power, and that will not my lord interfere at all with the minority status.
my next point is that azeez basha ignored the alternative meanings to establish.
this is relevant for our understanding of mother provincial.
it also understands but misunderstands the importance of recognition.
it says recognition, why is that?
that takes everything away, and you become really nothing more than an institution of government.
these are the broad arguments my lord.
because azeez basha takes a very narrow view of article 30.
now, my lord, may i take your lordship, to azeez basha.
volume my lord, 3-a. your lordships, turn to 3-a.
we feel my lord, it was so much better to handover the books.
so much better this way. i don't know.
there's no time spent in handing over books.
no, but the point is, one went straight
to the point, and then the books came out.
so there was a continuity that we had, which
is somewhat broken but that doesn't matter my lord.
i told your lordships, i'm a luddite and i'm amazed that your lordships' dexterity.
now my lords, page 3 of 3-a, is where the headnote is.
from the headnote itself, which i won't read out because i'll read from the judgment.
it goes into the antecedent history and says it's very
important and then ignores it because the 1920 act is there.
but let me take your lordships, to the judgment itself.
now my lords, page 7.
the union of india's stance, my lord, was that it's not a minority institution
but also it defended the statutes of 1951 and '65, which were before the
court. now my lord, there have been further developments. we have the 1981 act.
how can you now say, the 1981 act. i mean, i can understand that
the allahabad high court knocked down three provisions of the amu act because they
said it was a huge separation of judicial power. now, my lord, the chief
justice has dealt with this in pavitra ii.
i won't go into greater detail about it.
did '81 act change the basis or was it huge separation of judicial power.
in knocking down the preamble in two sections which i'll show to your lordships.
in actual fact, they said it's a huge
separation of judicial power and it's now next.
now my lord, kindly come to page 8.
here is the history of the establishment and it says, it's necessary to understand it.
i'll give your lordships of fuller account.
i won't take your lordships through it.
1970 syed ahmad khan says - the muslim community is neglected.
then my lord, there's a whole list of negotiations which i'll show to your lordships.
he wanted liberal education to muslims.
then he says, in 1872, the mao was established and then my lord, in
sequence of activities, a school was opened then lord lytton laid the foundation stone.
the mao college was established thereafter, and it is
a flourishing institution by the time of syed ahmed khan.
then, my lord, at the bottom of that page and your lordship, has to see
that, long negotiations took place that's the last three lines on that page, between the
association and the government of india, which eventually resulted in the establishment of the aligarh.
now, that is the antecedent history, we have to view it in
the light of st. stephen's, the antecedent history is important because your
lordships, will see that even st. stephen's was in fact a constituent
college under a statute, all our deemed universities are actually, as mr.
dwivedi pointed out to the court in yashpal, by or under a statute.
if azeez basha is taken at its limits, it could destroy the entire system.
now -'resultant, it is mentioned that before a large sum of money was
collected by the university, as the government of india made it a condition
that rs. 30 lakhs must be collected for the university before it could be established.
further seems that the existent mao college was made the
basis of the 1920 act for the administration of the university.
along with the properties and funds attached to the
college, the major part of which was contributed by muslims.
' this is the antecedent history and justice wanchoo recognizes this.
but he says, i am sorry, the 1920 act will
go by the establishment and that's the end of it.
then my lord, 'the preamble says it is expedient to establish and incorporate a
teaching and residential muslim university and to dissolve the societies under the society registration
act, which are known as mao. aligarh and muslim university transferred to vest in
the university, all the properties and rights of the societies and the muslim universities
foundation. but this is important because a continuity was established between the pre 1920
act and the 1920 act. this continuity is fundamental to our understanding. justice wanchoo
realizes this but then ignores it. now, my lord, kindly come to section 3.
it also mentions my lord, opposite place h that section 4 dissolved the mao
college and muslim university association and all the property movable, immovable and all rights
and powers of the privileged were. the funds were transferred through aligarh. this is
the continuity in section 4. how can you ignore it? mao is now being
transformed by section 4. of course, earlier, because of section 23 of the act,
the court, which was big body, had all muslims only. that was amended in
1951. now, my lord, go over the page. kindly come to place c. these
provisions will show that the three previous bodies legally came to an end and
everything that they progressed off was vested in the university by the 1920 act.
of course it was. but the continuity and nowhere you will see
in the act, as i'll show to your lordships, the muslim character.
section 6 is important because justice wanchoo finds fault with the
fact that the degrees, etc., will be recognized by the government.
this is precisely what your lordships have said in kerala education and others.
recognition must be given. then your lordships will see 13.
13 as i pointed out is a misunderstanding of
university education because university education is based on two templates.
the external template which is chancellors, visitors, visiting board and then it is
provided that the governor general will be lord rector, this becomes visitor later on.
and then it mentions at the bottom of the page that the lord
rector shall give notice to the university of its intention to cause an enquiry.
you said university education is based on two templates.
one was the external. and the internal.
and the internal would be the internal management of the university.
how would you define? it would be how the university runs.
this template is important and i might mention,
since your lordship is a chancellor of these universities.
look at section 7 of the bangalore act and the calcutta act.
then my lord, your lordships will see section 14, which is now no longer there.
but the important point, my lord, is at e. i'm sorry, my lord, my learned
friends want me to read c. the provisions clearly are putting out the final control.
it's not a final control. in the template, it is a supervisory control.
may i sit down for two minutes my lord?
mr. dhavan. there's no difficulty. you don't have to stand and argue.
i noticed that mr. parashar and your lordship said he could sit down.
i know. i remember that.
and he said - no. so i must resist
my lord and survive this time up to lunch.
you can sit down. doesn't matter.
dr. dhavan, this is because of you are lower
back issue, please sit down and please sit and argue.
it's perfectly fine. it might aggravate. out of concern i am saying.
and you can move the podium aside.
you can move the podium aside and you can
have a seat and you can come on the side.
thank you. in fact if you have a special chair in your office.
i didn't know that this is an issue with your back.
you could have brought the chair here and sat in the chair and argued.
it's so much more comfortable. no, it's very kind of your lordships.
one must suffer in the traditions of this court.
may i just sit down and place this my lord?
yes. he has a lot of courage.
he's been very unwell. anyway. those things should not be told to the court.
now my lords, kindly come to section 23(2).
the supreme court, the supreme governing body would exercise all the powers provided by the
1920 act, that's page 12, placitum c. this is the distinction between external and internal.
it's a misunderstanding of how universities are run.
sir ashutosh was chancellor, my lord, of calcutta and he took
a very prominent view in developing calcutta's institutions at calcutta university.
now, i come to section 23.
your lordships will say see that in the 1920
act only in muslims were members of the court.
the court is the supreme body.
now my lord, i've already dealt with section 24, 25.
what is said my lord, between place f and g is a little
sentence- 'this provision clearly shows that the final power rested with the governor
general.' now, my lord, that's the chancellor and of course his role completely
went, my lord, because he appointed only the first vice chancellor, et cetera.
but somebody had to do it.
now my lord, the whole import of this
is at the page 13, at the bottom.
'if anything, some of the important provisions to which we have already referred
shows that the final power in almost every matter of importance was in
the lord rector and the governor general and council.' now this is misunderstanding the template.
the rector disappeared and became the visitor.
do visitors have that kind of right to supervise?
very importantly so, my lord.
then my lord if your lordships will come to place c my lord.
so my lord the internal part is mentioned in 14, but
i come to place c. the annexure to the 1920 act
gave the names of foundation members of the court numbering 120,
who were all muslims and who were to hold office for five years.
then section 9 was deleted. now come my lord to page 50.
the next substantial change was made with the proviso of 23(1).
this is done in 1951 my lord, where, while the
court becomes the supreme body, it need not be all muslims.
now my lord, there is a decision of this court in gandhi faiz-e-aam.
krishna iyer, my lord, was a dissent.
that the fact that you place other people on
your board doesn't mean that you lose your minority character.
just as justice das says, sprinkling of in t.m.a. pai.
i'll show my lord those judgments as far as required.
then my lord if your lordships will come at 16,
place f. but i must say i'm more relaxed my lord.
i'm very grateful for your lordships. sorry.
i apologize.
now my lords, kindly come to f. 'we shall proceed' - that's the
third line, just opposite l - 'on the assumption that the present petitions
that muslims are a minority based on religion.' had he looked at the
entire act my lord he would have realized what the purpose of the act was.
now my lord, if your lordships will come over the page, we come.
so my lord there is really no dispute that they're
a minority and azeez basha says so in so many words.
we accept that it's a minority. we accept a connection with mao.
mao, my lord, was just the. amu was just the alter ego, my lord.
it is continuity of the mao act.
now my lord kindly come to page 18.
page 16 and 17, they say that words 'establish and administer' must be read conjunctively.
i'm coming to that. of course my lord.
but as i said, these are the rights that flow from article 30.
the indicia of what is a minority.
numerically, historical circumstances, the nexus which st stephen's and others see, that
is the important aspect of establishment, which goes to recognizing a minority institution.
establish and administer on the rights that follow.
so now my lord, 17.
your lordships will see it at a -'the
words 'establish and administer' must be read conjunctively.
it reads, to give the minority to administer an institution provided as
it has been established by, provided it has been established by it.
' so the more important point is establishment
and the right to administer will flow from it.
that's important, my lord, because justice wanchoo recognizes.
but where does amu, where does it get knocked out.
on the first stage. you were established by statute.
so he says, where is your right to administer?
it's not there at all. then my lord there is.
now this my lord is all conjunctive and this i won't go into that.
now, my lord the three questions on the top of 18.
'in azeez basha was whether it was established by the minority, first question. whether it
was a right to administer ever vested in the minority, and even if the right
to administer properties came to be to university, the minority before the establishment of aligarh
university, whether it had surrendered, it has been surrendered when the aligarh university came to
be established.' now, there's a very interesting at c, just top of c, that paragraph.
'before we do so we would like to say educational institutions are of
a very wide import and would include university.' now, this is a contradiction.
on the one hand, you say if it's established by statute, then you
have not established it, and this is a far reaching consequences and then
ugc act specifically says, you must do it by statute and by no other method.
and then my lord, 'this was not disputed on behalf of
the union of india, and therefore it establishes, it may be
accepted that a religious minority had. ' so, my lord, i'm sorry.
now, i was at 18. that there are very and would include university.
now, this is fundamentally important for the future and what azeez basha lays down.
if universities can only be established by statue, then the
first part of azeez basha says-' you have not established it.
' on the other hand, universities are part of the minority character.
and the union of india accepted that a
religious minority has the right to establish a university.
fundamentally, my lord.
now, we come to the famous st. david's college, when i show seervai
to your lordships, he says, one line seems to have been relied upon.
now we have looked at it carefully, the reason why david's
college was decided in this way was, that although it had
the right to confer degrees, it was not recognized by royal charter.
so this is my lords the support from st.
david, which i'll show to your lordships, if required.
and this has been a stinging controversy raised by various jurists.
then my lord, kindly come to the important part of
the university grants commission at the bottom of that page.
it says at h, my lord -'the importance of recognition
depended on the will of the government cannot be minimized.
' now, all the decisions on article 30 say that you cannot hold back recognition.
so, section 6 is right.
now at the bottom of that page - 'it was only in
1956 that section 22 of the ugc lays down - the right
of conferring degrees shall be exercised by a university established or incorporated
by or under a central act.' when we were arguing yashpal, mr.
dwivedi made the very important point that this
must be read conjunctively i.e. established and incorporated.
then, kindly come to b. 'it was only thereafter that no private individual
or body could grant a degree in india. therefore, it was possible for
the muslim minority to establish a university before the constitution came in force,
though the degrees would not be recognized.' now, my lords, where are we now?
because we have to take into account the ugc.
what is azeez basha's implications?
on the one hand, you said, 'universities can be minority.' on the other
hand, you say if it's established, i'm sorry you have not done it.
then my lord, kindly come next paragraph.
there was nothing in the 1920 act to prevent
the muslim minority if it shows to establish a university.
this is wholly incorrect. it couldn't have.
could only happen by charter or statute and this is true,
my lord, of many acts that we see in that area.
the 1922 delhi act which makes, for example say, st. stephen's of the constituent college.
'but if it did so, the degree was not bound
to be recognized by the government.' well, this is now history.
you have to recognize it. recognition cannot stand in the way of a minority character.
then my lord it says -'in the absence of
recognition of the degree, it may not have attracted students.
and that is why we find the constitution came into force.
most of the universities were established by legislation.
' incorrect, all the universities were established by legislation.
now, my lord.
then - 'aligarh university were also in the same way established by
legislation provided the section 6 the degrees, diplomas and other distinctions granted
or conferred by person deemed university shall be recognized as are the
corresponding degrees, diplomas and other academic institutions. then my lord, 'it is
clear that even though the muslim minority could have established at aligarh
in 1920 university, it could not insist that
degrees granted by such university should be recognized.
' this is only at variance with the jurisprudence of your court.
recognition and affiliation, t.m.a. pai says, 'cannot stand in the way of the
minority character.' then he says at g - 'the enactment of section 6
therefore, when the aligarh university was established by section 6, it's degrees were
recognized and the institution was brought into existence, which could not have been
brought to existence by private individual body or individual could not insist upon recognition.
but the more important part is the enactment of section 6
is a very important circumstance which shows that the aligarh university,
when it came to be established was not established by the muslim minorities.
for the muslim minority could not insist on the recognition.
' this is all passe'. your lordships have said otherwise.
recognition is fundamental.
when your lordships look, my lord, at the colleges and the schools, when they
were denying recognition, your lordship said, no, no, your recognition cannot stand in the way.
then my lord very important is h. 'it is true, as it
is clear from the 1920 act that the nucleus of the allahabad
university was the mao college which was till then a teaching institution
under the allahabad university. the conversion of that college, if we may
use the expression in the university, was not by the muslim minority.
it took place by virtue of the 1920
act.' this, my lord, is the crucial finding.
i take your lordships now to d, my lord.
now my lord at d - 'it may be that the 1920
act was passed as a result of the efforts of the muslim
minority. but that does not mean that aligarh university came into being
under the 1920 act and was established by the muslim minority.' this is the error.
all along you are saying universities can be minority institutions and at the same
time you are saying the intervention of a statute will deny you that status.
then my lord, i come to this.
no, no, it says my lord, that fundacio incipience and fundacio proficience.
my lord this means the incipience means at the process of granting recognition.
and my lord the proficience means my lord perfecting it.
in actual fact, it's wrong to rely on only the latter.
because amu was there at the beginning, that is at its
inception and also my lord, later on when it was established.
now, my lord, we come to a very
interesting area at the bottom of page 20.
what does the word 'established' used in article 30 mean?
if your lordships will go over the page.
it gives the different meanings of the us to settle firmly, to fix unalterably,
to establish justice, to make or form as to establish a uniform rule of nationalization.
to found or create, to regulate, as congress shall have the power to establish.
to found, recognize, confirm or admit.
' now my lord, it mentions the oxford dictionary and it says establishment
has a number of meanings to ratify, confirm, to settle, to found, to create.
the big criticism of mr. seervai and others is there was
a plethora of meanings that you could establish, use, but you didn't.
you picked up one which is there my lord.
'we are of the opinion that the purpose of article 30(1) means to
bring into existence so that the rights given to the minorities is to
bring into existence as education, and if they do so, to administer it.
we have therefore to see what happened in 1920 and who brought the
university into existence.' now, my lord, mother provincial, which is a six judgment,
bench judgment, confirmed by t. m. a. pai uses
the word 'found' which i showed to your lordship.
it's fundamentally different. my lord. what is the distinction between 'found' and 'bring into existence'?
my lord, bring into existence according to, according to the judgment is to incorporate.
whether by charter or otherwise.
'found' means you take into the antecedent circumstances and mother provincial at para 8
says that even if a single individual, philanthropic does this, it will be found.
we're not in the process of just a legal interpretation of 30.
we're in the process of looking at the entire process,
and he's absolutely right in looking at those latin terms,
at the instance of preparation and at the instance of founding.
now my lord, kindly come to the history again at placitum f.
'from the history we have set out above, it is clear that
those in charge of mao college, the muslim university association and the
muslim university foundation committee were keen to bring into existence a university
at aligarh. there was nothing in the law to prevent them.' but that's all true.
but if we, say, 'found', the connection can
be seen between the past and the present.
then comes a very important part at h. it may be accepted
for the present purposes that mao college in the muslim university education
association and the muslim university foundation, were institutions established by the muslim minority.
then over the page, it says it was under then.
'but if the mao college was to be converted into a university whose
degrees were bound to be recognized by government, it would not be possible
for those who were in charge of mao college to do so.' we
come to the same conundrum, that to establish means to establish by statute.
you accept everything about the minority background.
then, my lord, if your lordships will come to placitum f.
so their lordships did not examine the 51 and 65 act properly.
now, come to f, 'nor do we think the provisions of this act can
bear out the contention, that it was the muslim minority which was administering aligarh
university, after it was brought to in existence. it is true that the proviso
to 23(1) says, no person other muslims shall be a member of the court
which was declared to be the supreme body and was to exercise all powers.
we have already referred to the fact that the select committee was not happy
about this provision and only permitted it in the act out of different issues
of prepondering muslim opinion.' also, the select committee if
the majority is there, how does the minority discomfiture.
the important point here is if you prove you established, then only you'll administer.
it is not necessary, that the governing body must necessarily have muslims, gandhi faiz-e-aam.
nor is it necessary that all the students
should be muslims, kerala education bill and t.m.a pai.
then, if your lordships, after noting that the members of the court, the supreme body,
shall all be muslims, this is what is said at place c on page 23.
'it will then be seen that besides the fact that the members of the
court had to be muslims, there was nothing in the act to suggest that
the administration was in the muslim minority aspect.'
we have to see the act, my lord.
the two templates that i have given to
your lordships, the external template and the internal template.
then if your lordships will skip all this about article 26 and
come to one part 24 (f), 'but the right under 26 will
only arise by the institution is established by religious domination. it is
in this event it can claim to maintain it.' now, t.m.a. pai
specifically says, '26 is right.' and you say
'you can't prove establishment, therefore your right disappear.
' then, my lord. i won't trouble your lordships with.
27, my lord is important. my lord, this was an argument based on article 19.
but what is important if we see the act, my lord, there
is a transition in section 4 from mao college surrendering it's rights.
so my lord, we have mao college, all its property goes.
the old students who are there, have to sit the exam.
this continuity, according to this judgment is broken by the 1920 act, and
therefore we come to place c. 'therefore, when the constitution came into force,
there was no property which was held by the muslim minority. as such,
for the property vested in the corporate body, the aligarh university. even assuming
that before 1920 the property was surrendered, which was the property of the
muslim minority, 1920 act put an end to their rights.' my lord, transitions take place.
you have college. it gives all its property.
it gives everything, and that is the continuity, which is
broken now because of the view of the 1920 act.
it is now established that you don't surrender your minority status.
so these are the contradictions in t.m.a. pai.
it was a muslim minority, muslims. in basha.
i'm going to go to the act now.
(these are the contradictions) in azeez basha.
on the one hand it says a university can be a minority.
on the other hand, it says if it's established by statute it can't.
it says the nucleus comes from mao, but we can ignore it.
now this my lord, is simply unacceptable in the light of st. stephen's and others.
the antecedent history is important. and this.sorry.
there are films on lip reading.
now my lord, kindly bear in mind that if
azeez basha is right, no university can be a minority.
it's contrary to legislative practice, but my lord no institution.
and a deemed university, which has been recognized as a
minority was established in the words of mr. dwivedi, before yashpal.
by or under the statute all deemed universities acquire a statutory character.
now you say, it's established, a deemed university is established
by or under, this implication my lord is of importance, significance.
now let me take your lordship to the '20 act. volume 3-g
my lord. pdf 5. i've learned a new phrase, my lord, pdf.
is your lordship, there my lord? first read the preamble.
'in the 1920 act, as it was' there have been changes in 81.
'whereas it is expedient to establish an incorporated teaching in residential university
at aligarh, muslim university at aligarh and to dissolve the society's registered
under society's registration act, which are respectively known as the muhammadan anglo-oriental
college and the muslim university association, and to transfer and to vest
in the university, all properties of the said societies and of the muslim foundation committee.
' this is the continuity that is there.
now, my lords, just have a look at 2-h which says - 'university
shall mean aligarh muslim university.' then, if you come to 3, i've already
explained this governor general power is part of the first template, not the second.
now the continuity, your lordships will see in section 4.
here, the societies known as so and so, so and so shall be dissolved
and all properties of the movable and immovable and all rights and powers, the
privileges of those societies and all properties movable and immovable and all rights and
privileges of the muslim university foundation shall be transferred and vested in the university.
' this is the continuity recognized by this act.
there would have been no act, my lord, but for the foundation coming here.
then, my lord, 'all debt, liabilities and obligations shall be transferred to the university,
which is 2. all references in any activity, in any enactment to either of
the said societies, shall be construed as references to the university. any will, deed
or other document ' - i won't read all of it - 'shall be
construed as if the university was therein named instead of the society or committee.'
then, my lord, 'subject to any order of the court, the court may make
the buildings belonging to the mao shall continue to be known and designated immediately
before the commencement of this act.' and finally, my lord, 'subject to the provisions
of this act, every person employed immediately on the commencement of this act in
mao, shall hold employment under the university by the same tenure, same terms.' -
and then my lord - 'as if the act
had not been passed.' now, what is section 4?
how do we interpret it? azeez basha interprets it negatively.
our interpretation, taking into mind the antecedent history which
your lordships now accepts, has to be taken into account.
st. stephen's has a huge para on this.
it says, even the motives, if you see
it's in stephen's, even the motives show its character.
now when siddharth shankar ray was arguing for the
allahabad high court, he gave three volumes on the motives.
i'm not going to trouble your lordships with that one.
but clearly there was an institution, which in continuity became a university.
then 5, come to 2, my lord.
all this is ignored. the muslim character is ignored.
5, sub-clause 2, at the bottom of page 6.
this is the purpose that has been ignored by azeez basha, which
i mentioned in the, when i basically my lord, summarized what was wrong.
and your lordships will see some of the points
in the written submission, my page 14 to 25.
i'll quickly go through that when the time comes.
now my lord, what does 2 say?
'to promote oriental and islamic studies and give instructions in muslim theology
and religion and to impart moral and physical training.' this is completely ignored.
then my lord, if you come on page 7
to 5(12) after it says to do all other things.
at the bottom of that page it says 'islamic learning and muslim theology
to promote the interest of the students.' this is the purpose of the act.
7, if your lordship comes to page 7.
12. at the bottom of 12. i don't want to read the whole of it.
it's irrelevant. what is relevant is islamic learning and muslim theology.
now we come to section 6.
one is the power to grant degrees and
that 6(a) shall be recognized by the government.
this is absolutely correct, my lord, interpretation of article 30.
of course, it must be recognized by the government,
as all the decisions say, otherwise it will be valueless.
then, my lord, 7 mentions how the government said
30 lakhs should be given by as an endowment.
the nexus, my lord, is there because it is
these institutions that have to provide the 30 lakhs.
now over the page, there is an interesting provision which,
of course, would not stand in our feminist jurisprudence, my lord.
i didn't want to disturb your lordship's thinking.
now come to 8, my lord.
this won't stand, but it says something about the women are exempted.
now, this will not stand, my lord, but the understanding at that
time was this was linked with muslim jurisprudence and now it is deleted.
then my lord, 9 - 'shall have the power to make
provided that instruction in muslim religion shall be compulsory in the
case of muslim students.' this is consistent, my lord, with article 28.
and then what happened is this was deleted, and a choice was given.
i remember when i went to school, whether i should attend church or not.
they had to get my father's permission, and i'm very grateful i did.
i wasn't in the choir, but like your lordships, i could sing christmas carols.
now, my lord. we also had to give a letter.
(the reason for showing) this, my lord, is what was the purpose of the act.
now, all these provisions my lord show what the purpose of the act was.
grant education to muslims. even forcing muslims my lord to attend.
now that, of course was deleted.
then my lord kindly come to 12, which is very important, on page 8.
'the university shall, subject to the statute's power to maintain and establish
intermediate colleges and schools, within such limits of the aligarh district, as
may be laid down in the ordinances, for the purpose of preparing
students for the university and may provide instructions in the muslim religion and theology.
' its purpose, my lord, your lordship is very right, my
lord, in saying that we can't have these minority institutions with ghettos.
agreed my lord. they must be instruments.
institutions of excellence. they must conform to the general law.
and nothing in this act takes that away.
then if your lordships will come to 13, kindly just.
'the governor general shall be rector.
' this is therefore, the rector who becomes analogist to the visitor.
and that is where my template comes in.
the external authorities and the internal authorities.
and my lord, i am informed by my colleagues that this is verbatim
in all the other acts, that is section 13(2) 'for the rector, read
visitor.' we've given some examples in volume 4, that i will take your lordships.
so, 13 and 14 are taken care of and
your lordship wanted to know what the internal aspects were.
kindly come to page 10. it says -'the following shall be officers.
' so the rector as the visiting part are not officers.
that's the external part in my template.
then my lord, 'the successors to the first chancellor shall be elected by
the court.' the court, my lord, under section 23 was solely consisted of muslims.
then your lordships will see 18, 'pro vice chancellor shall be
elected by the court.' 19, 'the successor shall be elected by
the court.' 20, 'the pro vice chancellor shall be appointed by
the court.' and now we come to the most important section, section 23.
22, also my lord, you will see that the
visitor is not an authority of the court in 22.
now 23, is very significant and although noticed, the implications have not been worked through.
23 reads the proviso.
as far as the proviso later went, but as far as the '20
act is concerned, my lord, and the purposes of the act are concerned,
it says, 'provided that no person other than a muslim shall be a member thereof.
' and this continued till 1951.
now this is very important when you come to administer, the court was hands
on, my lord, in the administration of the university, as is clear from sub-section 2.
'the court shall be the supreme governing body of the university and shall exercise
all the powers of the university nor otherwise provided for in the statutes.' so
all this my lord is there with the supreme body which consists of muslims.
today there are non-muslims, my lord.
but the point is, this was the tenor of the 1920 act.
and then your lordships will see in 2.
we're only concerned with the recommendations.
that's the end of 2, my lord, of the lord rector.
now, your lordships have personal experience what it is it to be a chancellor,
what is a visitor, etc. your lordships may be non interfering, different from chancellors today.
one day that issue will come before your court also.
it's already. already, i'm sorry. we know that.
now look at 3, 'subject to the provisions of this
act, the court shall exercise the following powers and perform
the following duties.' this is the supreme body consisting of muslims.
'making statutes and/or amending or repealing the same, of considering ordinances, of considering
and passing resolutions on the annual reports, of electing such persons to serve
on authorities of the university, such as prescribed by exercising such other powers
and performing such other duties as may be confirmed or imposed by this
act of statutes.' the purpose of this is, administration will stay with the supreme body.
things have changed a little bit, my lord,
but the supreme body part remains the same.
then, my lord, i want to take your lordships to the statutes and ordinances.
kindly come to page 12. look at j on page 12.
'the instruction of muslim students in the muslim religion and theology.' the
next is important, my lord, 'the establishment of intermediate colleges and schools
and all other matters by this act, which by this act are
to be or may be prescribed.' now, this is referring to section
12 that within a radius of the mosque, you should establish these institute.
then my lord kindly come to 28.
come to the proviso at the bottom.
'provided that no statute dealing with the instruction of muslim students in the muslim
religion and theology shall require to be submitted or approved for approving.' now, my lord.
page 14, my lord.
as an argument in sub-section 5, the continuity is established, those
students who were in mao college may continue with their degrees.
now, kindly see the first statutes which are important.
the first statutes are there in page 16.
now this is in statute number 8, 'the court shall subject to the
provisions hereinafter contained consists of the following members.' kindly come to clause 2.
'the persons named in the annexure shall be foundation members.'
the annexure which i'll show to your lordship, was completely muslim.
on page 24, i'll come to that.
i don't want to get into all this.
so, the continuity is again established on page 19 at the top of sub-clause 3.
the graduates are there and who have been educated in the muhammadan anglo-oriental
college and are members of the association recognized for this purpose by the act.
now my lord, '20 persons elected by the central standing committee of the all india
muhammadan educational conference.' so, my lord, the link, my lord, with the foundation is here.
then my lord, kindly come to subsection 6.
it's very important my lord, that this statute has to be
read in a way in which azeez basha did not read it.
and basha did not even look at this one and
basha ignored the purpose, which is writ large over the.
now my lord, kindly come - '30 persons, sub-clause 6, 33, 9 persons
to represent islamia colleges and other muslim educations not under the control of
the university.' and then my lord, '15 persons learned, then 9 persons learned
in the muslim religion and oriental studies.' then my lord, kindly come to 50.
'the executive council shall have 30 members.' and 3 is important -'6 are the members
to be elected by the academic council and 20 shall be elected by the court.
' now, remember the court my lord, is all muslim at that point in time.
we see in 23 proviso my lord.
then my lord, kindly come to 22.
top of the page, 'two persons elected by the court.' just mark these my lord.
it's just, the purpose is self-evident and control is self evident.
this is the academic council. now my lord, come to 19.
this was there in the original act, my lord and the original statutes.
i won't read all of 19, my lord,
but kindly come to sub clause 9, 10, 11.
up to 11 my lord, all the way down.
what does it say? what shall the departments be?
'sunni theology, shia theology, islamic studies, arabic language and literature, persian,
urdu law.' these are the few institutions in india that protect
urdu, which as your lordship knows in the 8th schedule symbol.
when i went to pakistan my lord, they have
protected urdu in a way in which we haven't.
of course i have a quarrel with the 8th schedule node.
english is now an indian language whether we like it or not, it is.
you look at the literature, you look at the poetry, you
look at everything my lord, all the proceedings of this court.
there's no point taking this anticolonial view that, english is
as much in indian language and developed as an indian language.
my friends in england, my lord, used to say, you
have twisted the english language and adopted it as your own.
which is true my lord.
and as mr. sibal points out, we do it better than them.
but anyway my lord, that's not the point.
then, my lord, 21, at sub-clause 2 on page 23, graduates of other universities who
have been educated for the last two years at the muhammadan anglo-oriental college, link again.
then my lord, kindly come over the page and we see
the foundation members who are part, my lord, of the court.
i won't read out the names, my lord, your lordship will just note them.
my lord. giving degrees through first calcutta and then allahabad.
was affiliated to calcutta. affiliated and also.
later on with allahabad allahabad, that's right.
from surat also. there's somebody from surat.
so my lord. i'm sorry.
minority college, it can get affiliated to a university and get a degree from there.
but in the case of a university, that cannot happen.
so if you want. and without a university degree, you can't get employment.
so the real problem is if you say that, i should
have continued as an minority institution, nobody would have been employed.
because you have to get a degree, and that degree has to be recognized.
so if you are a university, it's the act itself that must
confer that this is the issue, at the heart of the problem.
section 6. but it was affiliated with.
correct.
i am saying that as a college, but once you create a
university, once you create a university, it can only be done by statute.
there is no other way to do it.
basha says, you can have a university, but that degree will not be recognized.
but that's not the answer to the question, because if
that is not recognized, why would you have a university.
the importance of azeez basha is saying that universities are a part of article 30.
it says so in so many words and that
they have a right to be recognized by a minority.
if that is so, we can't say tertiary education is beyond the scope of 30.
now, the fact that there were degrees through affiliation is
really a relevant topic because of the negotiations that took place.
you take my property, you take my people, you take the
students, you take everything and the staff, because it was essential.
of course, there was no article 30, but apply article 30 to azeez basha
under the '20 act. the whole point is the purpose of the act was
muslim in character and the purpose was nowhere to be found in azeez basha.
now, my lords, just note the pages. i just want to take your lordship
to my submission at page 61. page? volume 1-a. what page mr. dhavan? 61.
sorry, 60. shall i continue after lunch? yes. we can resume after lunch. my
lord, i want to upload my submissions. certainly, give them to the nodal counsel
and make them a part of the compilation.
i'm sorry to keep all of you waiting.
actually, both justice khanna and i were in
a meeting with the members of the bar.
senior advocates designation. so, this is something very important to the bar.
just the preliminary groundwork which has to be done.
this point one must ask for a trade-off, as i mentioned earlier.
but i'm very fearful of that.
because, when we were arguing 370, they gave me water and
i said whiskey , and i got calls from singapore and
all over india, was there whiskey in the glass or not.
now, i want to take your lordships to the statement of objects and reasons.
i'm still on the purpose point, which is in volume 4(a).
so, submission we'll look at. please have a seat.
please have a seat dr. dhavan.
look at the, look at the antecedent history of the institution, one, the purpose
of this statute and place the provisions of the statute in the backdrop of
the antecedent history and its purpose, and the mere fact that the statutory provision
somehow restricts what a minority institution could otherwise do in the absence of the
statute, would not be a ground to deny its status as an article 30 institution.
and that's the point about recognition also.
and recognition and affiliation, you have to apply according to you for recognition.
otherwise, your degrees will never be recognised.
even for schools, where they depend on aid.
that's the submission, really. even there, my lord.
colleges too. colleges. in fact, the whole part of inamdar relates to aided and unaided.
but provided, aided don't lose their minority character.
may i sit down? i am very sorry.
yes, dr. dhavan. please have a seat.
volume 4(a), page 88. you were reading actually, volume 1(a), page 60, i think.
i'll come back to that. okay. so, we look at volume?
4(a) at page 88. your lordships have it?
yes. this is the statement of objects and reasons to the 1920 act.
4(a). my lords, the printed version is on 87.
this is easier to read, because it shows the nexus that i was talking about.
the muslim university association, having requested the foundation of a university and
certain funds and properties being available to the said, it was proposed
to dissolve the association and the muhammadan anglo-oriental college, aligarh and to
transfer the property of those societies to a new body called the aligarh muslim university.
the present bill is designed to incorporate this university to indicate
its functions, to create its bodies and to define its function.
it also secures the university the assurance of a permanent endowment to the government.
and the necessary part of control. and the necessary part of control.
the university and the teaching residential type in accordance with the recommendations of the
calcutta university commission, the university will not include intermediate classes, but the university will
have the power to maintain intermediate.to establish and maintain intermediate colleges and schools at aligarh.
they're almost there my lord. the degrees conferred will be recognized by the government.
special features of the university will be imparting for muslim religious
education to muslims and the inclusion of the department of islamic studies.
the bill provides for the making 3, the general terms my
lords on page 89 of the bill and statutes have at
various times been discussed with the representatives or the muslim university association.
that's the purpose. now my lords i'll come to my written submissions.
i have my lord, in my summary, what the
reference is really about, i've given a short paragraph.
and then. this is 60 of your written submissions?
this is my written submission.
also, when we use the expression, article 30 uses the expression establish and administer.
yes. now, there is no absolute standard of administration, that you must administer 100%.
and even that 100% will be an elusive standard.
so, to make article 30 effective, we do not have to postulate
that the administration by the minority has to be an absolute administration.
in that sense today, in a regulated society, in a regulated state, nothing is absolute.
every aspect of.
virtually every aspect of life is regulated in some way or the other.
so, merely because the right to administer is regulated by a statute and to a
certain extent is not untrammelled, does not detract from the minority character of the institution.
that's the point we were making, i am grateful.
that is the essential point. and then you add of their choice.
of their choice.
and it's establish, establish means, you must have founded it, as you said.
right.
and that is a little more objective, but administration, i mean administration in
that sense there's no statutory definition or constitutional definition of the expression administer.
the courts have held what it means.
yes, the courts have held what administration means.
but if that right of administration is regulated itself by statute.
my lord, it can't be that it'll all be muslim, muslim, muslim.
it just simply cannot be, because after the constitution,
all the universities have a liberal element in them.
please give representation to students, representation to teachers.
all that is there, my lords, in our university statutes.
these things are very clear. you don't have to be administering only religious courses.
you can be administering a purely secular educational institution.
that's right. that's one.
second, the law is not that you have to admit only students of your community.
you can admit students of all communities, without
forsaking, because it’s the light of establishment and administration.
so, that's the second important ingredient.
and therefore, a minority institution does not lose that character according
to your submission, merely because various aspects of its existence are
regulated by statute, including aspects relating to the administration of the institution.
the state, in public interest is entitled to regulate, or the state legislature or
parliament, as the case may be, is entitled to regulate administration in public interest
to ensure that the conditions of service of the teachers are fair, that the
staff of the institution is not maltreated or not deprived of basic conditions of service.
there will be a variety of administrative requirements which the state
can impose or the minimum requirements for the allotment for the
conferment of degrees, standards of examination, standards of syllabus, the curriculum,
that's all regulated by the state, but that does not detract from the.
because that's applies across the board, irrespective of
whether you are a minority or a non-minority institute.
that's right.
and that's why i said, in the beginning, we accept that it must
be institutions of excellence and all the other regulatory features statute must apply.
with one caveat my lord, which is repeated again and again,
that the right to administer does not mean the right to mal-administer.
that's very important.
it comes in kerala education and then of course, my lord in t.m.a. pai.
just to get this purpose, et cetera, point dealt with, page 60, because
in our respectful view, the reference has to be culled out by your
lordships, because it mentions the minority act, it mentions the university act indirectly.
so all that has to be culled out, we've said, was
azeez basha right in accepting the antecedent historical data on amu's
muslim character, but denying its constitutional significance while deciding the issue,
of its minority status, which is at variance with st. stephens, proost and patro.
because they recognize antecedent history and just give it the go-by.
that point about nexus and continuity. origins.
what is the origin?
in st. stephen's, they go right through the origins, and they even say,
you look at the buildings and they are quite clearly, christian in character.
now, my lord. mr. dhavan, just one thing.
this you are raising it in the context of aligarh muslim university.
what will be the position post the enactment and enforcement of the constitution?
yes, of course. with regard to universities which are established or founded thereafter?
what we have seen is that a large number of deemed universities under the ugc
act and the other statutes, they've been declared to be minority institutions, despite azeez basha.
and therefore, my lord, we have to look at this
now also, as i will point, through the constitutional lens,
which is the question your lordship put to me, on article 30.
and, liberal education has to be combined with the religious education.
may i proceed? yes. 60, my lord.
i have dealt with this, but just as a preface to the next argument.
the muhammadan anglo-oriental college was the nucleus of the appellant university .
this is what basha says.
the founders had from the very beginning desired to incorporate mao colleges
as a university and grant degrees that are recognized by the government.
the muslim community largely contributed the funds necessary to incorp mao into a university.
the founders had long negotiations with the government
to introduce a legislation and establish the incorporate.
the mao college.
nonetheless, both courts have held now in allahabad
that the appellant university was not a muslim university.
the word establishment , is followed almost mechanically.
now, come to the antecedent history. i'll run through it very, very fast.
i realise time is of the essence.
now my lord, come to 61. we have divided the antecedent history into three phases.
from '70 to '77, where the earlier idea of such
setting up a university for the muslim community for the
betterment and advancement took place, and when mao college was established.
from '77 to 1910, the muslim community rallied to convert mao university, and
due to their efforts, the government, in principle, agreed to convert the college.
and from 1910 to 1920, where the founders from the muslim university actively
engaged with the government and succeeded in their desire to convert and incorporate
the mao college. the vision, my lord, in
the first phase. i'll just quickly run through it.
your lordships may read it through because i don't want to go too much.
in the first phase, in 1870, sir syed established the
committee for the better diffusion and advancement of learning amongst muhammadans.
the committee sought the views of the muslim community as to why
the muslims were not availing western education, and it was found that
this was due inter alia, lack of religious education, non-consultation with minority muslim.
thus, the idea of an educational institution managed by muslims
for the benefit of muslims with religious instruction received support.
then 1871, the mao college is established.
over the page in 62, when the committee says, the object of
the committee shall be to collect funds towards the establishment of the
college, particularly one for the education of the muhammadans, as suggested by
the central committee for better diffusion and advancement of learning amongst muhammadans .
now, the committee resolved to establish the madrasa uloom, madrasa
being a term for education, at aligarh, which was subsequently inaugurated.
this was the first step realizing the vision of a university.
then my lord, the madrasa established the mao college.
and then, i'll just say what the governor general says.
from the seed which we sow today may spring a mighty decree
whose branches like the banyan of the soil, shall in their turn
strike firm roots into the earth and send forth the new vigorous sapling.
that is, the college may expand into a university.
so this is the other element my lord.
as your lordship pointed out, it's not just
muslim education it has to be more than that.
and after the constitution, certainly so.
then, rules and regulations of mao say object of
the college shall be primarily the education of muhammadans.
then first, only the muslim community was involved in the administration and i
mentioned the select committee and the rules for guidance of the mao college.
over the page my lord.
the second phase, consists of the syed, 7.6.1, seeking the government support for
the muslim community and looking upon a degree as a means to success
and government jobs as recorded by altaf hussein hali in his biography of sir syed.
in further of the written address was presented to the college fund
committee to the viceroy, by far the greater portion of your funds
and endowments naturally derived from members of your race and creed, someday,
when our endowments are richer and our schemes are completed, we hope
to ask to confer upon us the legal status of an independent university.
the funds, come from.
then my lords, that's recorded in this book, in 1898, a memorial fund was
created to raise funds for incorporating mao college, and this proved to be a success.
1,27,000, was an enormous amount in those days.
i remember my lord, the amount we used to
get in my school, was only rs. 2 per week.
it was huge. so we have got to inflation prove this.
now, at the bottom of that page, those and other affairs by the
muslim community resulted in substantial funds collected for the establishment of the university.
then there was an address that was given when they met the viceroy.
his ideals and those of sir syed with regard to the expansion of
the colleges are , the view is the ultimate development for the formation
of a muhammadan university of which the idea was strongly supported by the
late justice mahmood, son of sir syed and by morison, our last principal.
the former indeed.the former may be indeed to have said, to have formulated,
if not fathered the university scheme while the latter developed it in numerous writings.
now this is the great justice mahmood my lord, as your lordships knows.
the privy council saw his judgments and said, you please become high court judge.
after that, he delivered i think eight significant judgments, and
then he resigned, to get himself involved in this process.
now, my lord, we come to the third phase, which is important.
in 1911, the muhammadan university foundation committee, now this is important, was constituted for converting
mao college into a muslim university with the raja saab of mahmoodabad as the president.
on the recommendation of government of india dated 1911, the
secretary of state approved in principle, the establishment of a
university at aligarh, subject to provisions of adequate funds and control.
1911 again, the government of india specified that a university
could be established only through a bill in the legislative council.
over the page my lord. yes.
then, my lord in 1911, page 65 or rather pdf 65, where an
institution styled as muhammadan oriental college was founded by aligarh in 1875 under
the leadership of sir syed ahmed khan bahadur with the special object of
promoting the diffusion of western science and literature and are training the character
of students by a scheme adapted to meet the special requirements of the muslim community.
both my lord, a liberal education as well as the demands of the muslim community.
and whereas from the beginning the object of the founder and the muslim community
was to raise such college to the status of a university, whereas a memorial
had been presented to the government by the trustees of the said college and
other representatives of the muslim community praying for the erection of a muslim university
and inviting advantages, inviting attention to the advantages the university would have, which would
confer, would confer on their community to the inadequate representation of which their community
had an existing to the enthusiasm which their own university would create amongst the muslims.
and then my lord, and to the need for religious teaching and protection.
so, the fact as we had pointed out in an interruption, that
mao college could still get degrees, that's not the only point my lord.
the point is of substance, a liberal education,
along with the concerns of the muslim community.
then 1911, the secretary of state says, sanctioning a university at aligarh
will be a source of enlightenment and prosperity of the muslim community
and will crown and continue the hopes of sir syed ahmed khan.
the negotiations continued, my lord.
and then your lordships will see, that five lines from the bottom on
65, in an intervening letter dated 09-10-1912, the education members specifically mentioned that
the movement was started without reference to government and that the hope of
sir syed to convert aligarh into a teaching and residential university, and his
hope had been repeatedly expressed since the leading
muhammadans and others are connected with the college.
also note that the draft constitution stated from the beginning the object of the founder
and the muslim community, was to raise the college to the status of a university.
1915 my lord, practical shape was given to this and the mao annual report,
i won't read it my lord, and it says the conversion should be there.
then my lord, 8 is important on page 66.
the muslim community raised 30 lakhs for the university as required by the government.
so, this is the interaction, the money was raised by the muslim community,
and this my lord, you find reference in the statute and in section 7.
now after extended negotiations, the muslim university bill
was prepared in 1990, referred to the select committee.
the select committee submitted its report to 02-9-19 at the 2nd of september,
the muslim community's predominant role in the university administration is clear from the debates.
in reference to the constitution of the court, we have retained
the provision that no person other than muslims shall be members.
we have done this because we understand such a
provision is in accordance with the preponderance of muslim feeling.
then my lord, the matter comes to the legislative council.
before putting the question, i would like to add congratulations
to the muslim community on the passage of the bill.
i have come, especially this morning, to preside
that i may add good wishes, et cetera.
then, the university act of 1920, was a statement
of objects and reasons which i've read to your lordships.
it is just not the degree as they said, you could do it before 1920,
it's a wholesome university with liberal education and the concerns of muslim theology, et cetera.
now all this, what azeez basha does, it says that
in the select committee, there was some disagreement on this.
that's not how to read a select committee.
i pointed that out to your lordships.
now, my lord, i have 7.8, is just important because,
your lordship doesn't look just at the de jure situation.
also, the de facto, and this we have pointed
out, that the members of the first court were muslim.
8 to 12 members were muslim. every chancellor to date had been muslim.
34 out of 37 vice chancellors have been muslim.
the vast majority of the members of the court, executive
council, academic council and executive council, have all been throughout, muslims.
now you want to take all that away?
because when appointments were made by the government, they
made sure that the appointments conform to the muslim character.
then my lord, i have already read, because,
st. stephens looks at the emblems my lords.
i just want to do 7.9.
when this was argued in allahabad, siddhartha shankar ray gave three volumes.
and the court said, yes, of course, it is muslim in appearance.
but we are bound by azeez basha.
now, the history background is.
architecture of the building, such as a deep
green colour, quranic inscription clearly show the islamic character.
photos were shown to evidence to the division bench.
the emblem of amu contains a quranic verse.
the university has a university mosque.
after the amendment was allowed to establish halls, hostels, special
centres, specialized laboratories only within 25 kms of the university mosque.
the university employs muezzins.
at its inceptions, the mau had departments of study, sunni theology, islamic studies,
persian and urdu, studies for islamic medicine, all that i've read to your lordships.
i don't need to read it further.
now, all these documents are in there.
i don't want to take your lordships through them.
i've just summarized them and to answer the argument sort of raised, it's just degrees.
you could have done it before.
no. you wanted a university, and you wanted a liberal education.
your lordships point it can't be full and complete control.
it can't my lord, especially after the constitution.
and administer, my lord, has to be considered.
now, my lord, i'll read some judgments, including t.m.a pai and mother provincial.
this your lordships will find in volume 5(a).
this will answer my lord justice khanna's question to some extent.
pre constitution, post-constitution, the change and the requirements.
now, kerala education bill, i'll be, in 5(a).
i'll be very fast my lord.
starts at page 4, but i'll go straight to 71.
i'm sorry. i missed out on page 60.
that is somewhere halfway down.
there is no reason why the benefit of article 30(1) should be
limited only to educational institutions established after the commencement of the constitution .
the language employed in 31 is wide enough to cover both pre-constitution and post-constitution institutions.
then, my lord, 61 is very important.
this is about 15 lines from the top.
the sentence beginning, to say that an institution which receives aid, on
account of its being a minority educational institution must not refuse to
admit any members of the other community only on the grounds therein mentioned.
and then to say that as soon as such an institution
admits such an outsider, it will cease to be a minority institution.
it is tantamount to saying that minority institutions
will not, as minority institutions, be entitled to aid.
now comes the important part.
the real import of article 29(ii) and 30(1) seems to be
that it clearly contemplates a minority institution with a sprinkling of outsiders.
let me pause here and get into it.
my lords that sprinkling now, after st. stephen has gone up to 40%.
st. stephen's says you can go to that extent.
and of course, my lords, this is modified
by t.m.a. pai says it may not be 50%.
it will depend on the needs of the institution.
then, by admitting a non-member into the minority institution does not shed
its character and cease to be a minority institution, indeed, the object
of the conservation of distinct language, script, culture of a minority may
be better served by propagating the same amongst non-members of the particular community.
in our opinion, it is not possible to
read this condition into article 30, subclause 1.
then my lords, page 62 comes the important pronouncement of the words of their choice.
this is just below halfway. i will go just halfway down.
the key to the understanding of the true meaning and implication
of the article under consideration are the words.has your lordship got it?
. of their choice.
it is said that the dominant word is choice and the content of that
article is as wide as the choice of the particular minority may make it.
the ambit of the rights conferred by article 30(1) therefore, have to be determined.
it should be referred.
to be determined on.misprint my lord by article 30(1) and therefore to be determined.
therefore to be determined on a consideration of the
matter from the point of view of the educational institution.
now all this somehow, kerala education bill was before basha.
the foundation had been laid here and the
analysis of article 30(1) is missing in azeez basha.
it just goes by established or administered , doesn't look at the question of choice.
now kerala is a seven-judge decision binding on tma pai for the interpretation of 30.
now my lords, 71.
this is halfway down because now, where it begins, we
have already observed that article 30(1) gives two rights to
the minorities to establish and to administer educational institutions of their choice.
the right to administer cannot obviously include the right to mal-administer.
the minority cannot surely ask for aid or recognition for an educational
institution run by them in unhealthy surroundings without any competent teachers possessing
any semblance of qualification and which does not maintain even a fair
standard of teaching, and with teaching matters subversive of the welfare of the scholars.
it stands to reason that the constitutional right to administer an educational
institution of their choice doesn't necessarily militate against the claim of the
state to insist that in order to get grant, the state may
prescribe reasonable regulations to ensure the excellence of the institution to be aided.
learned attorney general conceded that reasonable regulation may certainly be imposed.
so, both aspects my lords, excellence. these are not ghettos.
excellence and application of the general law.
then, if your lordships will come to 72.
it says at the top of 72, what the state says, i
have money and i shall distribute it, but i shall not give
you any of the unless you surrender to me your right to administration.
then the state must not grant aid in such manner, as will
take away the fundamental right of the minority community under article 30.
then about one-third from the bottom, no educational institution can, in actual practice,
be carried out without aid from the state and if they will not
get it unless they surrender their, if they will not get unless they
surrender their rights, they will by compulsion of financial necessity, they will be, .
they will be compelled to give up their rights.
so, my lords, this whole question of recognition, aid, you don't surrender rights.
76, my lords. this comes to the question of recognition, my lords.
azeez basha says, look, it's a section 6.
they're saying recognition that's by the state.
now my lord, about just half, last one-third.
then, about, just below halfway, without recognition, azeez basha says
you got recognition from the state, therefore you surrendered your rights.
in a sense, it's implying that, without recognition, therefore, the educational minorities established
or to be established by the minority communities cannot fulfil the real objects
of their choice, and the rights under article 30, cannot be effectively exercised.
the right to establish national educational institutions of their choice must mean the
right to education, to its right to establish real institutions, which will effectively
serve the needs of their community and the scholars who resort to their institution.
there is no doubt that there is no such thing as a fundamental right
to recognition by the state, but to deny recognition to educational institutions, except upon
terms tantamount to the surrender of their constitutional right of administration and their constitutional.
of their constitutional right of administration.
of the educational institutions of their choice, and in
effect, to deprive them of their rights under article 30.
so, recognition in the 1920 act, can't be
read as something that the government gave you.
but it is your right. it can't take it away, and it's quite clear here.
we repeat that the legislative power is subject to fundamental rights, and the legislature
indirectly take away and abridge the rights, which it could not do directly and
yet will be the result of the said bill containing any offending clause becomes law.
now my lords, this is the foundation of the
interpretation of article 30, totally ignored by azeez basha.
this is a seven-judge bench, my lord.
there is something in the kaveri reference, where your lordship said,
is it binding on us or is it not, my lord.
i think the wisdom now is that even the reference puts points of law.
now my lord, 94, i come to sidhajbhai.
mr. dhavan, my question was slightly different.
my question was. your lordship's voice is so soft.
okay. now, is it clear? probably. yes, much better.
yes. okay. my question was slightly different.
it arose from your argument that now, for a university, a statute is required.
now, the establishment, post the independence, after the
1956 ugc act will be under a statute.
now, when that is so, will this argument still
hold good, what your argument is, you're raising today?
because, there, it's a legislature there who's creating or enacting the statute.
then will you say the foundation is not by the statute?
yes, there could be cases of colleges, because colleges can be established by minorities.
there's no difficulty on that.
but your argument with regard to university, because it's to
be established by the statute, then what will be the position?
i had indicated to your lordships that, 'establish' cannot
be given the narrow meaning, that it's established by statute.
i indicated that you had to look at origins.
you had to look at nexus. you had to look at numerical.
this is the criteria.
now, if you take it all into account, the
question is, will the ugc act override article 30?
no. the fact that there is a requirement of statute will not offend article 30.
and then, as i indicated, mr. dwivedi was amicus in the
yashpal order, where he said, you interpret the ugc act as
by and under for every statutory authorities, deemed universities are covered.
they are under, by or under.
therefore, you cannot have a university, you cannot have a university
without degrees, without it and therefore, my lord, you can't read
down, with the ugc act, you can't read down article 30.
and then your lordships have seen in the reference in 2019, the
national minority education act, says you have a right to a minority institution.
so, your lordship's question may lead to an extrusion of tertiary education.
then the question of of their choice comes up.
i don't know if i've fully answered it.
and my lord, the private universities have come up, all under statute.
as long as the statutes permit them, they will fall in.
but now, if this university is set up under the
statute, if the statute itself says it's a minority university.
then obviously, because the funding is done by the, or the establishment
is done by the minority community and minority is a much wider term.
not restricted only to religious minority. the statute will never say.
that's where the problem will come up.
no, it doesn't come up.
because in st. david's, it is certainly true of england, that you have the right
to grant degrees, but you don't have a. it doesn't come in the royal charter.
your lordships will take the statute as it
is and then analyse whether it's a minority institution.
that is antecedent to establish and administer.
if i may say so, that the establishment, if it is
correlated to the statutes, is the wrong way to look at it.
what the statute does is recognize, not establish.
i'm talking about the initial establishment. establishment is not establishment through an act.
my lords, you establish something, it is recognized by the act.
you're saying that statute itself is a recognition of what you have.
yes, it's the recognition. the establishment happens.
how does it get recognized? because the statute says, you'll get a degree.
that's the act of recognition. without that, you won't get a degree.
that's the answer.
establishment of the fact that if the statute does establish or in
fact, brings into being, which is, mother provincial, the fact that it
brings into being will not militate under the minority right under 30.
we can't whittle down article 30, just because a statute exists.
and that is a defect in azeez basha, followed by the allahabad high court.
now if i'm right, the learned chief justice does not want me
to go into the allahabad decision which is under appeal before your lordships.
that would take a very long time.
it's a wonderful decision which says that dinner jackets have been exchanged for a sherwani.
great fun to read, chief justice roy.
is it saffron or is it green?
that's what he asks.
(he may be confused mostly constitutional act if it is by legislation and university
commission to exist won that being established. and then we give the parliament to
the legislature does not describe it as a minority, then so be it 's
not a minority which the answer is yes, he comes into existence by rendering
of a statute he respects the uds here. then you have to read the
statement. objects of reasons of that. particular statute as to why that statute of
brought into existence either the community approaches the government can the community approach the
government, like in this case, committee approaches the government. government then accepts the representation
leaks. the statute saying it is settled in today. in today's world, the persons
have to approach a particular state concentrate on saddaj vinyl. i think we did
such an statue of integral university which states that there will be provision for
minority and there is integral universities established by muslims and it is established through
legislation article 30 allows you to set up the universal it allows you to
set up universities implement that allow me to do all that we discuss in
the evening you read them better than i do absolute gandhia the right of
establishes fundamental rights is clearly declared in their terms absolute right the only thing
is, it's been watered down national interest now in terms of regulation, not in
terms of establishment, right? that's the difference and even so, that's not technical because
the court says it regulating, you can have certain restrictions on that, on the
regulatory pack, that is the whole regulation is section balance the question that) .arises
from your lordship's queries, is 30, establishment, the term establishment to be read in
a narrow sense, so that it can be taken away by statute
or in a wider sense, to define what a minority institution is.
the subsequent decisions of the court my lord, say read it in the wider sense.
you go back to the history; you try and figure out what the nexus is.
so ultimately, if your lordships are going to give
article 30 a narrow meaning by back to azeez basha.
and everything goes my lord. all tertiary education cannot be minority.
at a certain level what happens when a statute takes over
an erstwhile institution, whether it's a school, a college, and gives
it a statutory form, this statute really converts it into a body corporate.
because what was erstwhile maybe just a society, governed by
the society's registration act, is now given the statutory character
of a body corporate with a permanent seal and permanent succession.
does that conversion of a society into a body corporate, so
to speak under the provisions of the act, deprive it of
its minority character or is that merely only a matter of
form, to convert the form, which was a society into a body corporate?
or does that change in form completely destroy the minority character of the institution?
our respectful submission is, it is a mandatory form my lord, that is.
now my lords, this is a fundamental question that your lordship has to resolve.
azeez basha says, universities can be minority institutions.
it also says, they must be done by statute.
and if by statute, they go.
this is the unresolved question, which your lordship has to examine.
and along with something, which says at the end of article 30, of their choice.
therefore, you have to read establishment as not
the be-all and the end-all of article 30.
it has to be read as a whole, where it says, of their choice.
and azeez basha says, your choice can be a university.
and both in those days and now, if there
is a statute, so, will it all disappear, my lord?
the entire tertiary education will disappear. minority institutions.
and therefore, my lord, read the whole of article 30, which is, i've
already said, the words in kerala university, because the narrow, everything turns on establishment.
that is why mother provincial says it should be to found.
you take all the factors as to what is founded by the minority.
it may not be in the statute.
in the delhi university case, two cases were before the court,
the allahabad agricultural university and st. stephens and you don't find
that in the statute necessarily, but you have to see who founded it.
and your lordship as soon in patro.
as soon as you say, christian. they said it's good enough to found.
so don't.
, in my respectful submission use established, because, as your
lordship puts it, it's not a matter of form alone.
it's a matter of enabling form.
that enabling has to be there to come under 30.
then, my lord, we get to the questions of
substance and that is the argument we are advancing.
my lords let me take your lords to page 94, sidhajbhai.
yes. i'm sorry. i'm going as fast as i can.
super speed. now, page 113.
it's a six-judge bench, just as kerala was a seven-judge bench.
my lord, at end of the first para, kerala education case, therefore, is not
an authority for the proposition submitted by the additional solicitor general that all regulated
measures which are not destructive or annihilating of the character of the institution established
by the minority, provided the regulations are in the national or public interest are valid.
this argument is rejected, but you go to the extreme of saying was it annihilated?
that's the wrong question. then my lord, the next para.
the right established by article 30(1) is the fundamental right in terms, absent.
now, my lord, this was tweaked by tma
pai to say national interest must come in.
but as far as azeez basha is concerned, this was binding.
now, i come to the, it is intended to be
a real right for the protection of the minorities in
the matter of setting up of an educational institution of their choice.
the right is intended to be effective and is not to be
whittled down by the so-called regulatory measures conceived in the interest of,
not a minority, but of the public and nation as a whole.
now, this was before the court.
now i come to the next question, which, my lord the chief justice
has put, that what are the implications of the actual substance of these institutions?
the implications are, it must be an institution of
excellence and this your lordship will find on page 114.
this is the famous dual test, which is adopted by tma pai as well.
such regulation must satisfy a dual test.
the test of reasonableness and the test that it is regulative of the
educational character of the institution and is conducive to making the institution an
effective vehicle of education for the minority community or other persons who resort to it.
now my lord, i come to mother provincial,
which has emphatically been accepted by tma pai.
now, this is on page 163, and the relevant paras
which have been affirmed in tma pai are 8 and 9.
i'll take your lordship straight away to that.
page 166. this is actually a spy master.
it's spying on what we say to each other.
now, my lord, kindly come to 8, it is very important.
you have to switch off the mic, or tell us to switch off your mic.
we have. your lordship is right.
now, my lord, kindly come to 8 at page 66.
article 30, what it means.
article 30(1) has been construed by this court without reference
to those cases, it is sufficient to say that the
clause contemplates two rights, which are separated in point of time.
this is important.
the first right is the initial right, to bring into being of an institution.
.bringing into being of an institution. sorry.
the first right is the initial right to establish institutions of the minority choice.
now, when we read article 30, we don't go straight to establishment.
that's a consequence, it's my right.
we first examine whether it was a minority institution or not.
then, establishment here means, the bringing into being of
an institution, and it must be by the minority community.
the next sentence, important.
it matters not, if a single philanthropic individual, with his own means,
founds the institution if the community at large contributes to the funds.
the position in law is the same and the intention
in either case must be to found an institution for
the benefit of the minority, by a member of that community.
it is equally irrelevant that, in addition to the minority community, other minority.
other minority or even from the majority community can take advantage of the institutions.
such other communities bring in income and they do not have to be turned away.
now come to 9.
this now, i'm dealing with, after the azeez basha,
i've dealt with before azeez basha, sidhajbhai and kerala education.
now my lord, 9.
the next part of the right relates to the administration of institutions.
administration means, management of affairs at the institution.
the management must be free of control so that the founders or their nominees
can mould the institution as they think fit and in accordance with their ideas.
i'm sorry, my spectacles are not working.
and this idea of how the interests of the community
in general and the institution in particular will be best served.
no part of this management can be taken away and
vested in another body without an encroachment upon the guaranteed right.
now in para 109 of tma pai, this is affirmed.
and it's a sea change my lord, from the establishment version in azeez basha.
you first look at, is it a minority institution, then you go further.
now, sorry, now, if your lordships will come to 10, this is
where it says such regulations do not bear directly upon management, as
although they may indirectly fail, yet the right of the state to
regulate minority institutions, education, education standards and allied matters cannot be denied.
the minority institutions cannot be allowed to fall below the standards
of excellence expected of educational institutions or under the guise of
the exclusive right of management to decline to follow the general patterns.
and this applies also to management. a university doesn't become insular.
that's very important that your lordships have mentioned,
and nobody is arguing it should be insular.
then, i'll take your lordships straight away to st. stephens
and then tma pai, and i'm done with this part.
page 384. found, how do we approach it?
it is there in proost to some extent
and patro, but i'm coming straight to st. stephens.
now, kindly come to page 4. no, please come to 413.
para 29. there's a subheading, 'origins and purpose of st. stephen's college'.
i'm sorry if my reading is somewhat erratic.
i'll try and be more careful.
now, delhi university in this pleading has neither
denied nor admitted the minorities of the college.
then my lord, it says that, they argued that it was done by a
foreign mission from cambridge, and therefore, it was not entitled to the benefit of 30(1).
413, page 29, para 29.
then my lord, it goes through, and i'm not going to
read it, because, these are the factors that you take into account.
the '81, a christian missionary college came. members were in residence. the cambridge
brotherhood wanted to establish a christian college. then all that is mentioned and
the condition to the contrary is therefore, not correct. 'the purpose of starting the college.
' this is halfway down of this para.
'could be seen from the report of 1878 to cambridge
brotherhood', and it states that the students after leaving st.
stephen's mission college joined non-christian colleges and lose touch with christian teachings.
the case would be otherwise, if we were to send them from
our school to a college where the teachings would be given by christians.
that's at, placitum (e). now come to 30(1), which is important.
because, these are factors, there are environmental factors but they are important.
and in aligarh, it is writ large that this is an islamic institution.
30(1) says, originally the college building was housed in hired premises paid by the spg.
a new building was eventually constructed by the society for the propagation
of the gospel, wherein the foundation stone bore the following inscription, to
the glory of god and the advancement of sound learning and religious education.
the new building was then started in december 1881 and on
the front of the porch at the top of the parapet,
a cross in bas relief was displayed, and under the brackets,
'ad dei gloriam', which has been inscribed since, and since adopted by the college.
today, the new college building campus has also a large cross
on top of the main tower and, to perpetuate and remind
the students the motive and objective of the college, the glory of god.
this all emanates from found. the primary right is found.
the consequential rights are establish and administer.
now, 34, sums it up.
'it would thus appear that since its foundation in 1881, st. stephen's college has
apparently maintained its christian character and would be evident from its very name, emblem,
motto, establishment of a chapel and its religious
instructions in the christian chapel for religious ceremony.
this is the scope of inquiry. now, my lord, come to 417, para 41.
it was contended that st. stephen's college, after being
affiliated to the delhi university, had lost its minority character.
in other words, when you come under statute under
the delhi act of 1922, do you lose your character?
so that's the statutory provision.
then it says the argument was based on some provisions
of the delhi university act and the ordinance made there under.
it was said that the students are admitted to the university and not
to the college as such, but we find no substance in this contention.
in the first place, it may be stated that the
state or any instrumentality of the state cannot deprive the
character of institution founded by a minority community by compulsory affiliation.
since article 30(1) is a special right of
minorities to establish educational institutions of their choice.
the minority institution has a distinct identity and the right to
administer with continuance of this identity cannot be denied by coercive action.
any such coercive action would be void, being contrary to the constitutional guarantee.
the right to administer is the right to
conduct and manage the affairs of the institution.
this right is exercised by a body of
person in whom the founders have faith and confidence.
such a management body cannot be displaced or reorganized if
the right to be recognized, is to be recognized and maintained.
so, recognition doesn't stand a, reasonable restrictions are permissible, but regulations should
be of a regulatory character and not abridge the right under 30(1).
so, here we see the intervention of statute.
as a constituent college, it was by/under the act of 1922.
then, my lord, if i may come to page 422?
para 54. i'm sorry. i didn't realize, your lordship was conferring.
the minorities, whether based on religion or language have the
right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
the administration of educational institutions of their choice under
article 30 means management of the affairs of the institution.
this management must be free from control so that the founders and other nominees can
mould the institution as they think fit and in accordance with their ideas how the
interests of the rest of the community and the institution in particular will be served.
then my lord, i would like to come.
sorry, the next line. i'm sorry.
the standards of education are not a part of management as such.
the standard concerns of the body politic is governed by
considerations of the advancement of the country and its people.
such regulations that do not bear directly on
the management or they may indirectly affect it.
the state, therefore has a right to regulate the standard of education and allied matters.
minority institutions cannot be permitted to fall below
the standards of excellence expected of educational institutions.
now, they cite the cases, which i needn't cite, because
they say this is now confirmed by a string of decisions.
this is in line with both the decision of justice hidayatullah and
mother provincial and the judgment of justice jagannath shetty in st. stephen's.
they don't refer to.they don't cite the judgment in basha, they refer
to all the other, because perhaps basha in that sense is a
little out of alignment with what was laid down in the other decisions.
as you will see that justice hidayatullah, that passage you read out and actually,
para 54 is a restatement of justice hidayatullah said in para 9 and 10.
absolutely. but justice hidayatullah refers to all the earlier cases, but doesn't refer to basha.
my lords basha is referred to in st. stephen's but it doesn't do anything.
stephen's refers to sidhajbhai, bombay education. at para 24 page.
basha is on a fact situation. yes.
i think my learned friend is arguing his case already.
now my lords basha. now my lords kindly just turned to 410.
. on page 410. it mentions it in para 24.
and para 25 says it's been superseded by patro.
my lord para 24 on page 410.
i won't read all of it because this we've done.
then, my lord, 25.
a couple of years after azeez basha, this court had another occasion
to determine the nature of an ancient institution claiming to be minority.
the decision, as per reported in s k patro since it appears to be in
close parallel with the case at hand, it would be useful to drive the contentions.
then my lord, the contentions are there.
and then what happened, in para 27.
on appeal the judgment of the high court was reversed
by this court mainly on two grounds, that's at page 411.
the high court did not pay sufficient attention to that part of
the evidence supplied by the petitioners, which was sufficient to justify the
claim that local citizens had participated in the establishment and the school in question.
indian citizenship not being a condition of the application of article
30, the protection there under could not be denied on this basis.
so, my lord, here we have a clear statement that
if you take patro into account, you have to look
at the evidence and this court reversed it on that basis.
now, back to. may i continue? yes.
page 424. the bottom of the page, para 59.
lays the foundation for tma pai.
the need for a detailed study on this aspect is not necessary.
the right of minorities, whether religious or linguistic, to administer educational institutions and the
power of the state to regulate academic matters and the management is now fairly settled.
so, that regulation to bring it up to an excellent institution, is
there, the right to administer does not include the right to mal-administer.
the state being the controlling authority has the right to regulate all academic matters.
regulations which will serve the interest of students and teachers and to preserve
the uniformity in standards of education among the affiliated institutions could be made.
the minority institution cannot claim immunity against the general pattern or standards
or general laws, such as the laws relating to law and order,
health, hygiene, labour relations, social welfare, contract, tort, which are applicable to all communities.
so long as the basic right to management is not
taken away, the state is competent to make regulatory legislation.
regulations shall not have the effect of depriving the right
of minorities, to educate their children in their own institution.
that is a privilege which is implied by the right conferred in article 30.
433. now 433, para 80. . that you're not admitting only students from your.
and those others who resort to it.
others who resort to it. that's the important part my lord, kerala.
and now here.
otherwise, what will happen, it will become a communal institution, we don't want that.
it's a kind of protection, and i've said in st.
xavier's, it is needed there, to avoid discrimination against the minorities.
i won't go through, st. xavier's. it's a very long decision.
now, kindly come to 80.
broadly speaking, 80 says reiterates kerala education bill and therefore, now come to 88.
i have just two more quotations from st stephen's, which i feel
that your lordship will indulge me. we are nearly at 4 o'clock.
i will read and do tma pai tomorrow.
yes.
now my lords, 88, since the receipts of a state at 435
does not impair the rights of article 30(1), the state can lay
down reasonable conditions for obtaining grant and aid for its proper utilization.
the state has no power to compel minority
institutions to give up their rights under article 30.
and then my lords sidhajbai. then the regulation cannot change the character of the institution.
such regulations must satisfy that dual test my
lords, of reasonableness and excellence, reiterated here again.
now, kindly come to page 439. at the bottom of the page, para 102.
lord, may i just read it? yes.
your time controllers are here, my lord.
'in the light of all these principles and factors, and in view of the
importance the constitution attaches to protective measures to minorities under article 30(1), the minority
aided institutions are entitled to prefer their community candidates, to maintain the minority character
of the institution, subject, of course, to conformity with the university standards. the state
may regulate the intake. in this category and due regard to the need of
the community in the area which the institution is intended to serve. but in
no case shall an institution exceed 50%. the
minority institution shall make available at least 50%'.
now my lord, from trickling, we have now recognized 50%.
of course, tma pai says, it's in the nature of the institution.
just read the last but one sentence, once again.
sorry, my lord? just read that last but one sentence, paragraph 102.
the state. 'the minority institution shall make available', that one?
yes.
at least 50% of the annual admissions to members of
communities other than the minority community, the admission of such
minority candidates shall be done perfectly on the basis of merit.
of course, in st. stephen's they said, you can do an interview, which was crucial.
delhi university said, you can't do an interview.
and although it was a. so, please don't comment upon it.
so, my lords, i will stop here, if i may, and
thank your lordships for your gracious acceptance of my taking the chair.
we'll re-assemble tomorrow morning.
