my lord, so far as the constitutional scheme emerging from the conjoint reading of entry
fifty four list i and entry twenty three and fifty of list ii is concerned,
mister salve has already taken your lordships from hingir-rampur till kesoram judgment, which i'll not
dwell much upon except for ten minutes.
just a brief overview, but my lord, i would.
yes. i'm sorry, my lord. i would like to place before your lordships the government's
perspective why the architecture of the mmdr act is the way it is and how
it impacts the power of the state versus power of the centre. but before i
do that, i want to make one thing very, very clear because the impression which
is unintentionally gathered is this that this is kind of a federal issue between centre
and the state and who has the legislative competence to levy.
at the outset i say that is not the question here.
my lord, here and as i will explain in a little more detail with some
facts, figures and statistics.
yes. the way mmdra works, and it is intended to work as a limitation, is
this my lord. it is not a fact in dispute that the mineral rights and
the ownership of mineral vests with the states, and therefore, every penny of royalty goes
to the state government. if your lordship would not like to write down, i have
the propositions also, my lord. in the end, my lord, i can give the propositions.
yes. just to make it more convenient for your lordship. yes. now every penny goes,
the state government grants the lease.
the lease deed format is provided in the central statute. the state government collects the
royalty. the royalty figure is fixed by the central government. the state government appropriates that
royalty amount with other amounts which i will show as a part of its consolidated
fund.
yes. these are not the facts which are in dispute or which can be in
dispute.
yes. now my lord, why the centre discharges the function of only fixing the rate
of royalty qua each mineral?
there are several factors my lord, which i will show.
but broadly, to ensure uniformity in the price structure throughout the country. yes. and my
lord, our domestic price structure, we'll have to take into consideration, two factors.
i'm just giving a broad overview.
one, the domestic requirement, which can only be decided at the central level.
and second, since the royalty has a direct nexus with the price of each mineral,
we will have to be very, very careful and conscious about the global market qua
that mineral.
if that mineral is cheaper somewhere else, people would start importing, indian domestic users and
vice versa.
so, it directly impacts the import-export.
i’ll, my lord, go that.
go into the details.
next, and the most important thing.
my lord, as i would show from one report, which is report a prepared every
three years.
your lordships are aware section nine provides that the royalty will.
the rates of royalty would be changed every three years.
there is a report prepared.
it was really heartening to know.
yes. a classic example of cooperative and collaborative federalism.
what the central government does?
your lordship need not write.
my lord, in my note, your lordship would find everything.
we call for the views from all stakeholders.
stakeholders would mean industries; stakeholder would mean people who are going to be affected by
the industries.
because ultimately, we have to protect the environment as well.
and essentially, and more importantly the state governments. i'll show my lord, from the last
report of twenty nineteen that the state very effectively involved in the process.
they say that - 'this particular mineral, bauxite, please increase it by two percent.
because this is our revenue generation.
these are the reasons why it should be something more'.
then, i'm sorry my lord. then the subgroup after receiving all these detailed inputs examines
'what are the global scenario'?
, 'what will be the impact on the export-import'?
all these minerals are required for the core industrial sector of the domestic market.
that is taken into consideration.
the core industrial sector is the heartbeat of any economy.
my lord, that is considered, and i will show that to your lordship. and thereafter,
with reasons why the state's request is either accepted or not accepted, a price is
fixed qua each mineral.
and thereafter, the central government is out of it.
now you collect, you appropriate, you do whatever welfare activities you want to do in
your state.
the only dispute between the parties, my lord, in these proceedings is, after having.
it is our case, that when we decide the amount of royalty, the figure of
royalty, that is all inclusive, taking into consideration all your requirements.
what the states say that over and above the royalty, we can independently levy certain
amount under various names.
what we believe and what my lord the act perceives, the objective of the act
is that whatever i am saying my lord, i'll be able to make good from
the record.
suppose iron ore or bauxite.
some amount is fixed, say one hundred rupee per ton or per whatever pits mouth
value, et cetera.
that also was argued, but i'll show that's not relevant for this purpose.
so, the amount comes to, say, one thousand per ton giving an absolutely hypothetical example.
they say that every state will have a power to levy more than one thousand.
we say no, it is all inclusive.
and the reason is this.
if every state starts imposing further levy, in some case it would be fifteen hundred
per ton, in some state it would be only one thousand per ton.
in some state it could be eleven hundred per ton.
the uniformity of the prices will not be maintained.
and i want to flag below that issue before i take your lordship through this
my lord. mister solicitor, as you are formulating your thoughts and you have given the
example of bauxite and you say that this rate that is determined and you said
that this is done after elaborate consultation with the stakeholders, including state.
and then you say the state is trying to extract over and above the all-inclusive
price that you are suggesting to us.
that's correct.
now, taking a cue from the example of bauxite have you not boxed in this
tape so far as exercise of their power under fifty, entry fifty list (ii).
i could not understand the last.
you see, i have said that you have boxed in everything.
so where does the state have the power to exercise under entry fifty their power?
that's my lord.
respectful submission let the entire architecture of mmrda, under which this box price, inclusive of
everything, is fixed, is a limitation on the state's legislative power under fifty.
it's totally denuded you see, the state's power.
that's my respectful submission.
correct. but otherwise.
i'll just give an example, my lord, why this creates a problem.
why should the.
of course just asking.
you are just at the starting point.
why should the act, the statute, not say that this is what the tax that
the union is charging and to that extent the power this denuded or something to
that effect?
why are we asked to read this by inference?
my lord, my legal submission would be different.
we also have the situation of -- i mean i was just discussing article two
hundred and sixty five which will be forthcoming.
it is there.
it's there.
invalid tax.
it will be unconstitutional.
but i'll be able to show that there is an inbuilt statutory mechanism which says
that this amount and nothing more.
otherwise, my lord what happens.
just giving.
of course, example would not be the basis for your lordships to decide.
but i'm just giving an example, the rationale why my lord this is under the
central control.
the fixation.
suppose there are two states a and b. a has electricity generation station of a
huge capacity.
they are using coal as a raw material.
b has raw material mines, my lord. they are namely the coal mines.
they say that over and above r's. one thousand, which is the royalty fixed by
the central government. i'll give examples.
in many states, pre–india cements, other cess- education cess, different nomenclatures - was three hundred
percent royalty, five hundred percent royalty, et cetera, et cetera.
so that state a having the electricity generation plant will have to either pay more
from state b because every state has a different price structures.
mister solicitor, that is implicit in a federal scheme, you, see?
therefore, unless you say that, look when you fix, as you call it, an all
inclusive royalty that royalty includes all taxes also that can be levied by state.
you have to go as far as to establish that.
correct. that the fixation of royalty is itself inclusive of all taxes states nothing more.
that's one.
second your argument that, well, it's desirable that there should be uniformity of the price
of minerals.
it may be a desirable.
it may be a desirable matter as a matter of policy.
the question is whether this will impinge upon the federal distribution of power into the
constitution. now take another case, there are several taxes the states can levy under the
state list. i'll just give you two examples.
entry fifty three of list ii - taxes on the consumption or sale of electricity,
right?
now in various industries, electricity is not just a medium, but it's a raw material.
for instance, in the production of steel, iron-steel industry.
electricity itself is a raw material.
it's on the price structure also.
right?
and now the constitution contemplates that each individual state can levy a tax on the
consumption and sale of electricity.
now different states levying taxes at a different rate on the consumption and sale of
electricity will meet with the same argument that you are urging that in maharashtra may
impose it at a different rate, karnataka may do it as a, solar plant in
rajasthan may do it at a different rate.
but that's part of the federal scheme or take entry fifty four - taxes on
sale and sale of petroleum crude, high speed diesel - high speed diesel is crucial
for industry - motor spirit, natural gas.
so, if you are consuming natural gas from, say, which comes in from jamnagar, different
rate altogether.
if you are importing natural gas, which has come in through, say, a crude pipeline,
a gas pipeline say in chennai, completely different rate.
that's exactly the scheme of the constitution and there is nothing sui generis about minerals
that there should be a uniformity.
now the same logic will apply to electricity, have the same rate of electricity, same
taxes for electricity.
that example and i'll give the answer.
i'll give the answer.
in other entries like electricity or entry fifty four list ii. there is no provision
like entry fifty that's subject to limitations placed by the parliament under fifty four.
therefore, there is a safeguard.
suppose, say jharkhand places taxes at the rate of five hundred percent.
ignore that example.
i'll make it good on other.
suppose some state levies taxes at the rate of, say, three hundred percent, something disproportionate,
which will really affect the industry, and that state is a primary source of that
mineral in india. parliament can certainly regulate the rates.
when you are prescribing limitations, you can say that - 'look rates will not exceed
so and so.
rates on this mineral will not exceed so and so'.
you can have differing limitations for differing minerals.
my lords, please ignore that example for the time being.
union has not thought through.
how they can use the limitation power, imposing power to ensure that whether states are
not restricted in imposing taxes.
the taxation structure in a state does not affect overall the development of the mineral
or the development of the industry.
parliament can still do it, but they have to do it in a nuanced case
by case, mineral by mineral basis.
that is where my lord, we would respectfully argue that mmrda is that restriction what
is the constitution says limitation on.
this is sui generis for the simple reason.
this is the only entry, taxing entry which is made subject to some other entry.
there is no other taxing entry.
number one.
number two, in case of.
it is not made subject to the other entries; it is made subject to limitation
in the interest of regulation and development of minerals.
so, it's emphasised very carefully.
mister solicitor, if you want to sit for a minute?
no. i am okay.
the limitation is a constitutional limitation.
it is not any kind of limitation.
so, a constitutional limitation has to be read in the context of article two hundred
and sixty five of the constitution. and that too in public interest.
because there can be no taxation except with authority of law.
so, a constitutional limitation to tax juxtapose with article two hundred and sixty five must
be the.
correct, my lord. i bow down.
interpretation. i bow down.
my lord, second, as my lord, i am putting.
mister solicitor, you have to answer.
you're banking upon the fact that states have say in determining royalty. there, you may
not be right.
under section nine (three), it is the exclusive power of the central government to decide
what is the royalty. states have no power.
see section nine, sub-section.
it is exclusive domain of the central government. states do not have any say in
fixing royalty. if your lordships can, my lord, consider allowing me to develop further.
we are just pointing out so that you can answer it.
certainly, my lord. i'm conscious of the fact that the consultation is not statutorily contemplated.
that's what my lords are very rightly putting it to me, but the consultation is
read in every provision, that's what i'm going to show.
please take my written submissions, my lord. where do we get them?
volume ii(f).
and my lord, i will ignore whatever is argued or whatever may perhaps not be
relevant immediately.
volume?
ii(f).
it should be ii(e).
it was thereafter changed.
there was some mistake.
at night, my lord. we should ignore (e)?
yes. please ignore.
and possible delete it.
if it is possible to delete.
annexure was wrong.
instead of 'the report of twenty nineteen ', 'report of ' ninety ' was annexed.
there was nothing to hide in there, but that was no relevance of that.
got it, page?
page five.
page four, pdf five.
i'm sorry.
pdf four.
i'll skip what is not relevant.
but what is relevant, please allow me to read.
this history relates back to the industrial policy. i'm not reading it, but i'll just.
i have annexed.
my lords, historically, not immediately, but at some time after independence, we declared our industrial
policy. first was ' forty eight and thereafter ' fifty six.
i have annexed it for your lordship's reference and record.
but i'm not going to read it.
but, the intention to place this is this, my lord, that the nation for the
first time decided how our industrial growth will take place, what would be the roadmap.
and there, they divided certain sectors in schedule a, schedule b, schedule c, and schedule
d, where core minerals were placed in schedule a. because they are directly or indirectly
responsible for industrial growth of other industries.
that's the purpose.
now please come to pdf six, my lord, para four.
pdf five, my lord. i'm sorry.
pdf five, para four.
i'm sorry.
this is wrong.
i'm sorry.
pdf six.
i am as usual behind the rest.
para four, my lord. 'the industrial policy resolution nineteen fifty six put major minerals such
as coal, lignite, mineral oil, iron ore, copper, zinc, atomic minerals, et cetera, in schedule
a, which was reserved exclusively for public sector. and minor minerals in schedule b, which
the private sector, was allowed to participate in mining activities'.
your lordships can, my lord, thereafter, come to page five, para five.
'the minerals available in the nation, are naturally finite and are perhaps the most valuable
resource for the development of the country. minerals are the vital raw material for the
core sectors of the economy.
the exploration, extraction and management of minerals have to be guided by national goals and
perspectives to be integrated into an overall strategy of country's economic development.
the endeavour shall be to promote domestic industry and reduce import dependency which make domestic
industry resilient and self-sustainable'.
my lord, this is the difference in other cases, like electricity, et cetera, we don't
have to see the global market.
that can be, my lord. and please, my lord, for the time being, allow me
to say please.
don't treat this as a federal issue.
there is no state versus centre it is the state government which collects everything only
for the reasons which will follow.
the price figure, royalty fixation, the quantification is done by the centre, keeping the global
phenomena and the domestic scenario in mind.
then your lordships may come to seven, para eight.
this is my lord, more relevant why.
to answer the chief justice of india's query, why minerals stand on a different footing
and why it's fixation.
fixation of everything which is to be extracted from whoever is liable to pay is
to be federally governed.
if i may use that expression.
'(a) the mining sector and extraction of mineral, by the very nature of the subject,
requires to be taken up holistically at a national level as its regulation and development
shall have to be based upon the following'.
my lord, please see each one of them carefully.
'national landscape for protection, exploration and extraction of mining.
mineral being a national wealth, its distribution for the benefit of every citizen of each
state, as per principles of socialism enshrined in the preamble'.
then, three) 'impact of high burden of levy on indian minerals in comparison to international
mining jurisdiction'.
this is crucial.
my lord, if high burden is put on each mineral by different states differently, we
may not be able to my lord deal with the global situation.
four) is really crucial my lord, according to me.
i'm sorry.
your lordships when examines or the interpret the entries or any constitutional principle.
your lordship would examine, would keep in mind these factors because these are in public
interest as administered under fifty four.
but let me proceed rather than.
para four.
parliament can always say that while prescribing limitations, apropos to your submission.
we understand the policy issue in the submission.
but parliament can always say that -'look, the carrying cost of this particular mineral should
not exceed a certain amount'.
so, then you can indirectly ensure that the tax structure out of hand.
that is said.
that is said.
i want to show that if your lordship can, just bear with me for some
time.
i'm just giving the justification for it.
and this is my answer, that architecture itself is a limitation.
please see my lord four.
depends this one is really crucial for the nation.
'dependence of'.
and for the time being, your lordships may consider, put below these two entries on
the side.
just examine bear a situation, my lord, which the country is dealing with.
and thereafter, i'll come to two entries and how the law has taken care of.
'dependence of imports for certain minerals and regulation of exports of domestic minerals, use of
which is needed for the core domestic industries'.
now, please note this my lord. 'the import and export is mostly based upon the
comparative price fixation in domestic as well as global market and such price fixation shall
depend upon the levy of royalty and other others imposed on each mineral in india'.
meaning thereby, if we overtax a particular mineral or suppose some mineral is available only
in two states.
it is over taxed, then the domestic industry in rest of the india would go
for importing the cheaper mineral from the other countries.
this has a direct national impact.
then five.
'the national concern about growth of mineral sector at a national level so as to
ensure that share of mineral industry contributes in the country's gdp'.
when we say that we have a law for regulation and development of mines and
minerals, we also mean, that we wanted to regulate and developed in such a fashion
that it contributes to the gdp as a sector, not state wise.
then six.
'the fixation of consolidated amount like royalty, et cetera, at a national level for each
mineral will ensure availability of domestic mineral at a reasonable price as compared to international
prices.
separate levy regime by mineral restates results into disparity and high cost of domestic production,
leading to closure of mines, necessitating import of cheaper mineral from global market.
fixation of the total levy on minerals in such a manner that not only the
concern of all mineral rich but the concerns of mineral deficient states are also taken
care of'.
because the industries would be situated, core industries which are using these minerals, my lord
in other non-mineral states.
so, they get one particular mineral at one particular price, and they don't start importing
or if some state decreases the royalty, they can even start exporting.
my lord, i can face the contention that you remove the.
you stop the export.
but mmrda is a one-time solution.
one solution that - 'no, we will fix everything'.
so, there is no difficulty in domestic production, domestic pricing vis-a-vis global price.
then my lord, nine.
just as you are fixing the rate of royalty, is it not possible, as the
learned chief justice said, to have a ceiling or fix a rate of tax?
the power to tax is with the state. that is there.
but you can have a rate of tax or a ceiling on the tax to
have uniformity with regard to taxes also.
my lord, constitutionally, it's going to be my submission that under entry fifty it says
- 'tax on mines and minerals subject to limitations imposed'.
this is the only entry where taxing power is denuded by the central law for
mines and minerals if it is in public interest.
the judicial inquiry would be while examining entry fifty, whether this is a tax by
the state -yes. whether there is a law made by parliament under entry fifty four
list i for regulation and development of minerals and i'll show all this comes within
development and regulation of minerals.
and third, whether that law of parliament is contrary to federal structure or is in
public interest.
i am showing my lord public interest, right now.
now eight, my lord - 'to bring in uniformity in the structure of regulation and
development of minerals in other aspects so as to make it an investor friendly regime,
incentivizing more investment in that mineral sector while balancing environmental concern as a holistic national
level.
the development of mineral industry needs uniformity at a national level, failing which, fragmented state
wise levy will adversely impact the development of minerals and systemic utilization of minerals in
larger public interest'.
the moment there is an act under entry fifty four, regulating and providing for development
of minerals, that puts a limitation on the taxing power, apart from the specific limitation,
which i'll show.
but my lord, my first respectful submission is that the architecture of the mmdra, the
rules framed there under and the formats, statutory formats.
statutory formats in k. specimen k. not specimen.
form k. mister salve read one part of it.
but i will read the other part of it, which specifically says, that 'you are
being given lease'.
what is lease?
mineral is a national resource.
it's owned by the people.
government is only a custodian, a trustee.
in five judge bench, your lordships have accepted this principle regarding natural resources, et cetera.
what we are giving my lord, by way of a lease.
we mean the 'state'.
right to extract, sell and appropriate the sale proceeds of something which is a national
resource.
in consideration of that, what is paid, is 'royalty'.
and my lord, the way, form k is couched, says that - 'this, this, this
and nothing else'.
royalty, rent, dead rent and rent, nothing else.
that's my lord, the statutory contract one enters into when one takes the privilege of
sharing the national wealth and appropriating it for commercial use, which is also necessary.
i'm not opposing that concept.
now, your lordships kindly come to, para twelve.
it means nine.
pdf nine, my lord. i'm skipping what is not necessary, my lord. there is one
thing, you may not skip, mister solicitor general. come to para nine.
my lord. iv. this seems to be the sub-stratum, the heart and soul of your.
what your lordship means 'answer'.
right?
correct. the only contention is, the state's assertion that over and above the amount of
royalty fixed by the central government with their active consultation, they can still independently impose
levies, exercising its legislative competence under entry fifty list ii of the seventh schedule. your
principal argument is that every penny of royalty goes to the state. no problem.
my lord, justice oka pointed out sub-clause three of section nine of the act. just
give us some illustration.
one or two.
what are.
what is the nature of other levies which you are talking about over and above
royalty?
it comes subsequently.
my lord, in pre–india cement era.
so, one clarification.
yes, my lord. is it your complaint that they are not adhering to schedule ii,
which fixes the rate of royalties?
they may be strictly adhering to the price fixed in schedule ii. but over and
above those, royalty, they are levying some other taxes.
yes. and what they do is.
your argument is that that is not permissible by virtue of article fifty four.
read with fifty.
right?
that's your argument.
so, what are these other levies, which is impermissible for the state to impose?
yes, my lord. please come to.
i'll answer that first and then come back to my lord, my.
correct. page of fifty five, my lord, if your lordships can come.
fifty five, my lords. please see, my lord, para ninety three.
just to immediately answer my lord's question.
my lord justice pardiwala's.
then you may proceed in your own way.
i'll come back to.
this will give insight.
this is very pertinent question.
and i also want to highlight this.
this is all which is.
it's a bone of contention.
it's not an adversarial.
para fifty five?
para ninety three, my lord. page fifty five.
yes. page fifty five, yes.
para ninety three, my lord. your ladyships get?
your ladyship gets?
got it.
yes. i'll read.
'it is submitted that a decision permitting state to impose taxes on minerals, mineral rights,
would inevitably lead to a return to the scenario prevalent prior to india cement judgment.
this would be contrary to public interest, et cetera'.
now ninety four -'to get a sense of the scenario prior to india cement one
may refer to the rates of cess, or tax imposed by states at that time,
as derived from the report of the study group on revision of rates of'.
- this is the source -'published in march ' ninety.
the rates imposed were these'.
for example, the first state, cess at twenty five percent of royalty. then cess at
thirty seven percent of royalty. so, it's a royalty plus the cess at twenty five
percent, which, according to you, is objectionable and not permissible.
yes, and please see further - 'mineral rights tax on coal at three hundred percent
of royalty'.
my lord, today i can show after kesoram, it is five hundred percent in one
state. i don't want to go into state versus centre. then mineral rights tax on
other minerals, one hundred percent of royalty. then please see the next state. cess on
iron ore at three hundred percent of royalty, then cess on limestone and pyrite at
two hundred percent of royalty, cess on bauxite, china clay, dolomite and fire clay at
one thirty three point three three percent of royalty. therefore mister solicitor, now, you have
given us the building blocks of your argument by suggesting that -'look, if the states
are left untrammelled to impose taxes, what would be the impact?
states will start imposing radically disproportionate taxes, variant taxes, so on'.
we've got that point.
i think the heart of your matter really is, how do you read the mmdr
act?
and you may be right.
you can demonstrate that to us, because that's really the crux of the matter, how
do you read the mmdr act as imposing a limitation on the state power to
tax under entry fifty four.
i get that my lord. that is the heart of the matter.
so, you just spell out now those provisions of the mmdr act, which can be
construed as limitations on the state power to tax, because that they also concede that
the entry of the states, entry providing for taxes and mineral rights is subject to
the union power to impose limitations.
now, the question is whether you have, in fact, as parliament imposed a limitation.
and which are those limitations?
so, you can spell out to us.
that really is the core of the matter.
may i come to that answer, my lord, a little later.
ten minutes later.
before that, i want your lordship to see, how section nine is understood and how
that consultative process has taken place.
it would be necessary, my lord, before you.
which page of your submissions?
how section nine has worked so far and i would also.
why i'm not immediately answering this question.
when mmrda was enacted, there are parliamentary debates that -'we want to denuded the states
from putting any other thing, any other levy'.
therefore, there is some chronology which i have conceived.
your lordships can take it from me.
there are two types.
as i have earlier also said that person who has something to say and person
who has to say something.
my lord, i would fall in first category.
your lordships can rest assured.
there is something new which, from the state's perspective, your lordships, sitting in this combination
must know, that's all.
yes. is it your argument that section nine is exhaustive of all the levies which
a state can impose?
yes. on the right to mine.
yes. section nine read with section thirteen, the rulemaking power, read with rule thirty one,
read with annexure f, the format.
and that i will now connect, but before that some history may be necessary, for
some facts may be necessary.
please come to see.
i earnestly request your lordships to see the scheme of the act and the rules
in the context of what i am going to show.
please come to page one hundred and twelve.
i have produced report.
my lord, for only this kindly allow me to use the physical copy.
there was some confusion at night when i read some other report was annexed therefore
my underlining is in the physical copy.
i'll revert back to the digital copy, my lord. it's one hundred and thirteen, my
lord. and in this context, after this, showing this, i'll immediately come to the scheme.
proof for revision of rates.
immediately i'll come to the scheme.
this is a report of the study group for revision of rates.
please mark this my lord. this exercise happens every three years as per section ninety
three.
the solicitor general got away by saying, please permit me to use the hard copy.
i do not know whether the bench members have that privilege or not.
my lord, i admit, i am technologically challenged.
no, i put myself in the same footage.
and not only you and i, but i'm sure there are others also.
but substantially we have shifted.
but what happened was at midnight not midnight, one o'clock when i was, my lord,
marking my notes so that i can give exact paginations, i found that the annexure,
this annexure was wrongly put.
it was another report which was put so i could not my lord. we have
the one by doctor k. rajeshwara?
yes. i had the hard copy so i marked hard copy.
rest my lord i am on the digital.
please come to page one hundred and eighteen.
how this is holistically and at a federal level considered and your lordship may note,
this exercise has taken place every three years after the act was passed.
section nine, apropos justice oka's query.
my lords are right.
textually, it does not provide for consultation.
but i must point out, when this act was enacted, some states in the parliament
said they provide for a consultation, which was opposed by the government of the day,
and consultation was not placed as a statutory provision. but it has always been read.
and look at the level of consultation which will give.
my lord, i'm not showing it for nothing.
which will give the honourable bench, my lord, the idea, why national level fixation of
one price?
and what are the considerations which are going into it?
which can never be done if it is fragmented, state wise imposition.
that's the purpose of showing this.
please see, my lord, one hundred and eighteen.
the first para -'the principles of'.
and my lord, kindly bear with me.
i'll go a little slowly.
so far as this report is concerned.
'the principles of royalty rest on an accepted legal and customary base.
minerals are non-renewable assets which once removed, cannot be replenished.
as owner of minerals, the state needs to be adequately compensated for the permanent loss
of an asset, thus depleted.
royalty, therefore, whether fixed as a share of profit from the mining industry or as
a compensation for a depleting asset is a consequence of ownership of an asset, to
which, the title is transferred'.
my lord, this is to answer, whether it is a tax or not.
please come to page one hundred and nineteen.
'royalty regime in british india'.
it has always been federal dominated.
for this reason, my lord. 'in the british regime, grant of mineral concessions were regulated
by government of india act nineteen thirteen.
subsequently, as per the government of india act ' thirty five, many constitutional changes were
brought about under this act and minerals became provincial subject.
as a consequence, then provincial government of assam, bihar, bombay and united provinces framed their
own rules for granting mining concessions.
in nineteen thirty nine, the government of india framed, 'mining concession rules thirty nine '
for regulating the grant of prospecting licenses and mining leases in centrally administered area.
the mining concession rules, specified royalties on mica, petroleum and natural gas, oil, shell, gold
and silver, iron ore and precious stones.
and the rest of the mineral were not specified.
the royalty was based on a specific percentage of the sale value in respect of
specified minerals, except oil, shell, iron ore, gold, silver, and so and so'.
now 'present legislative provisions', your lordships can, consider skipping and come to chapter two, page
one hundred and twenty one, para two point four. i have marked it.
so that i may not have to read what is not directly relevant' but your
lordships can go through it at leisure, if required. two dot four comma your lordships
have, my lord? one hundred twenty one.
or may i read?
'with a view to have comprehensive review of the royalty rates on all minerals, in
terms of its impact on production, mineral based industries, export and the state revenues for
the first time in the year nineteen sixty six union government set up a study
group.
this study group submitted its report in nineteen sixty eight and recommended delinking of royalty
rates from the pit's mouth value for most of the minerals and suggested unit of
production that is tonnage, as the basis.
because of the difficulties experienced by the states, in administration of charging royalty as per
value of minerals at the pit's mouth, which led to litigations and disputes.
subsequent study groups constituted in the year ' seventy three, ' seventy eight, ' eighty
four, and ' eighty nine, retained the tonnage system'.
please see two dot six comma my lord. 'as a result of the adoption of
the policy of economic liberalization and also as a sequel to international roundtable conference held
in new delhi in april ' ninety four under the aegis of the undp the
ministry of mines constituted a study group in january ' ninety five with a view
to rationalize the rates of royalty to make them comparable with the international rates'.
please mark this.
i am on entire act being read as a limitation and the act is in
public interest.
please my lord allow me to proceed further.
'international rates and at the same time ensure rapid development of mining industry and augmentation
of revenue earnings of the state governments'.
this is treated as a part of development of mining industry.
this national level price fixation is treated as a part of development of mining industry,
which is the act. therefore, my lord, i said - 'the act itself is a
limitation'.
i'll point out the specific provisions also.
and it also says that we want to augment the revenue of the states.
so therefore, at the cost of repetition, i'm saying -'this is not a federal issue.
state versus centre'.
yes, legislative competence of parliament versus legislative competence of state assembly is an issue, but
not a confrontational federal issue.
then two point nine. ultimately, i'll show that entire act occupies the field as a
limitation to entry fifty list ii. that's one of my attempts.
that's why i'm going in a particular chronology. two dot nine comma my lord. 'consequent
to the notification of royalty rates in two thousand four, a high-level committee was set
up under the chairmanship of sri. so and so, member, planning commission to review the
national mineral policy and recommend possible amendments in the mmdra. the recommendations of the hlc
in respect of royalty were as under'.
please see only (d) and (e) my lord. 'a lowering of rates to be considered
only for such mineral, for which there is evidence to show that the royalty rates
are inhibiting.
mining operations and mineral production is registering a downward trend'.
they have studied and recommended this, and these recommendations are the foundation for subsequent fixation
of royalties.
'the royalty rates of base metals, noble metals, and precious stones in which the country
is grossly deficient needs to be low to encourage exploration for these minerals'.
this also cannot be done fragmented way by the respective state governments and the act,
as i will show the architecture, acts as a limitation on any other taxing power.
then your lordship, kindly turn the page and just three lines above para two point
one one at pdf one hundred and twenty four.
four line, my lord. 'this schedule to the mines and mineral development act on escalating
scale, taking into consideration measures for effective deterrence against the mines.
both the recommendations of this study group the revised rates of the royalty, et cetera'.
then two point one one 'the period between two thousand seven to twenty eleven witnessed
significant development in the indian mining sector, mineral sector.
based on the recommendations of hooda committee, government of india in consultation with state governments,
replace the national mineral policy with new national mineral policy on the thirteenth of march
two thousand eight.
the national mineral policy provides for a change in the role of the central government
and the state governments, particularly in relation to incentivizing the private sector investment in exploration
and mining and ensuring level playing field and transparency in the grand of concession, et
cetera'.
now, please my lord turn the page over.
chapter three, pdf one hundred and twenty six.
my lord. i'm sorry.
there is a global view is examined by the committee, and this is examined every
time when there is a revision of royalty rates takes place.
now come to one hundred and twenty nine, last three lines.
these are all factors which would lead credence to my argument subject to my lord's
approval that the act, architecture of the act and reading section nine, the way my
lord central government has read, operates as a limitation contemplated under entry fifty.
last four lines.
'it is evident'.
the lordship gets one hundred and twenty nine?
'it is evident that prevailing royalty rates in other countries are much lower than india
and mainly in the range of two point five percent to seven point five percent
on ad valorem basis.
for ease of comparison, fifteen mineral rich countries have been considered based on significant occurrence
of the specific mineral'.
this is the examination which my lord is taking place every time there is a
revision in fixation of mineral rates.
then, my lord kindly come to next, one hundred and thirty.
and that is where government's concern comes and that would possibly persuade your lordships to
treat the act itself as a limitation, apart from three or four specific sections which
i'll show.
because act is my lord, please bear in mind, providing for development and regulation of
minerals and once the field is occupied by provisions which makes the development possible and
regulation possible.
my lord, i will show some of the judgments the regulation would also mean prohibiting
taxation.
it could have been expressly provided under the act, a prohibition on taxation.
but that is not there.
my lord, i will answer that question straight away.
it is not provided.
it is not provided.
it is not provided but no statute my lord, to my knowledge, would provide a
negative provision that you, the state legislature, will not tax it.
it occupies the field and the resultant constitutional effect is your power of tax is
taken away.
i will come to that, my lord. but i want your lordship and my ladyship
to see this, then i am coming to.
and i'm aware.
whatever is the extent after section two is the extent of limitations.
yes. that's.
i bow down.
that is the correct position.
it's not that, it's controlled everything my lord, under the universe.
whatever is.
what is beyond, what is provided, is the question now?
correct. to answer that question, i'll have to necessarily go through this chronology.
yes. whether. it is entirely your lordships discretion to accept it or not, but your
lordships must have the background, in which your lordships are examining the question because this
is a nine-judge combination and my lord, the law laid down will have huge impact
on the economy of the nation. import-export policy of the nation, and the domestic production
industry of the nation. because these are all used in core manufacturing and other domestic
industries.
and therefore, my lord, this was the position even when the constitution was free.
therefore, only entry where taxing power is subject to some limitation.
i know, i have to answer limitation, frowned where?
i'll answer that, but please see my lord. section nine has been the consultation is
read into it.
why my lord, the state needs to impose any further levy for augmenting revenue that
is taken into consideration while fixing the royalty. to answer her ladyship's query.
my lord, again, i'm putting it in a different way.
there is no negative provision in the state.
in the act that state legislature is denuded of the power.
because no legislative drafting would have such a provision.
negative provision is not required.
how, my lord, that negative provision is ensured?
that part is implied according to you.
no. it's implied.
by occupying the field.
if i am sitting on the chair, doctor singhvi cannot sit on this chair, by
occupying the.
we don't think that he will do that.
no, the question is.
mister solicitor, we don't think that he will do that.
we don't think he will even attempt to do that.
so, my lord, i don't have to say that - 'no. doctor singhvi will not
sit in this chair'.
i occupy the chair.
that's my answer.
but the question is -'what is beyond the chair'?
the chair is not exhaustive of everything.
that's what i'm.
there is something beyond the chair, which is not occupied.
i'll show, my lord. when the fixation takes place, everything beyond the chair is also
taken into consideration.
it is, my lord, as the chief justice said, it is a block.
it's all inclusive.
mmdra is a complete code in itself.
when it provides for fixation of fiscal levy, it exhausts all fiscal levies.
that is my respectful submission.
please come to my lord, para four dot four comma that is one hundred and
thirty one.
and this is what would be the problem, if india cement is to be disturbed
and kesoram is to be.
i'm not worried about india cement or kesoram. i'm on a larger.
i'm before a larger bench, my lord. neither of the judgment binds.
i'm sorry.
one hundred and thirty one para four point four. this is very crucial.
'indian mining sector is carrying the burden of highest taxation in the world.
the effective tax rate, for example, in case of iron one.
iron ore works out to be as high as sixty four percent in case of
the mines granted before the twelfth of january ' fifteen and sixty percent in case
of the new mines granted after the eleventh of january '.
your lordship knows, in twenty fifteen, auction regime took place.
otherwise, it used to be first come, first served, et cetera.
'against this high incidence of taxation prevailing in the country, the internationally effective tax rate
is in the range of thirty one percent to forty five percent as depicted in
the table given at the end of the chapter.
the mining sector in india is heavily taxed, and not only in comparison to international
level'.
please mark this.
'but also, in comparison to other domestic sectors.
the taxation regime for mining in india affects all downstream industries and employment opportunities in
the country. while fuelling the already skewed balance of payment through additional import of minerals
here.
hence, there is a need to rationalize the taxation structure'.
they do not say mine royalty. they are rationalizing the taxation structure on minerals.
'taxation structure for the mining sector, for sustainable development, and deriving long term benefits in
terms of sustained raw material security for the industries'.
we can't exhaust everything in ten years.
but our structure should be such that, it competes with several factors.
then they have gone to effective tax rate.
'value of all amounts paid to the government'.
please, mark this.
kindly underline the word 'all'.
'value of all amounts paid to the government and divided by total revenue from mineral
sales'.
please my lord come to the next page.
mainly they have given mineral producing countries and compared with indian position.
mongolia is thirty one point three zero percent effective tax rate.
similarly, canada, et cetera, et cetera, last two are india new mines, that is after
twenty fifteen, fifty nine point eight four percent.
and old mines - sixty three point nine seven percent.
this is the taxation structure as compared to global and this includes all, everything which
is payable to the government, including royalty. so, they are deciding the fiscal structure, not
royalty only, keeping in mind every fiscal levy which is permissible or impermissible except what
is quoted at the bottom.
'etr does not include a number of other payments, such as auction price'.
now after twenty fifteen, i have to participate, and i'll have to pay premium.
'auction price, purchase of land for mining, gst at eighteen percent, ten percent tax levied
by supreme court'.
it's a wrong word.
not 'levied by the', 'levied under'.
under the order. levied under the judgment.
judgement. that's right.
levied under the judgment of the supreme court. 'levied by the supreme court in goa
and karnataka and fdt levied by karnataka as well as highest rate of royalty on
iron ore in odisha'.
because they are imposing their own levies.
odissa and karnataka are imposing their own levies.
that is also considered.
that is not considered.
still, still, this is the high level of taxation.
'net present value in case of survey in forest land'.
i'm not going into details.
'net present value is four point three eight lakhs to ten point four three lakhs
per hectare depending on density of forest at the time of grant of lease'.
then compensatory afforestation, et cetera.
now, please come to the next page where the total fiscal payment is decided.
'one of the main objectives of the study group as laid down in terms of
reference is to review and suggest changes in the second schedule to the mmdr act'.
second schedule contains the royalty. 'regarding the royalty rates keeping in view, the objective of
mineral development'.
please see this.
this is an exercise in the interest of mineral development, which is a field occupied
by the centre. because they are not only deciding what amount will get to which
state?
they are examining how the national development in the sector of minerals will take place.
how would we regulate the mineral sector and mining sector in a fashion that it
is developed.
so, this amount is under the act providing for development of minerals.
then your lordships may kindly see five point two. 'the study group had a series
of meetings on so and so and so at hyderabad for deliberating the methodology to
be adopted.
in depth analysis of international and domestic demand supply scenario price trends of principal commodities'.
because they use raw material, minerals as raw materials.
'review of taxation and fiscal regime'.
please mark this.
'and fiscal regime and engagement with all stakeholders to formulate the final recommendations of the
study group'.
this exercise is undertaken at the cost of repetition every three years or four years,
whenever there is a revision.
then your lordship, may kindly come to the next page, para five point five. they
prepared questionnaires, two questionnaires, one sent to affected parties, that is, mining industry and second
to the state governments so as to decide how the final figure is to be
arrived at.
para five point five. 'the questionnaires were also circulated for seeking information from the stakeholders
with regard to the criteria for fixing rate of royalty preference for ad valorem basis
or tonnage basis for charging royalty on minerals, periodicity of revision of royalty, perception of
the state government for the revenue earned for the imposition of royalty, utilization of royalty
for infrastructure development, environment protection, guidelines on charging of royalty, guidelines for computing royalty on
minerals on ad valorem basis.
separate entry for so and so and so and so.
now, kindly see next page.
'new factors since last revision of royalty rates and dead rent'.
because twenty fifteen regime, that is the auction regime, steps in.
'after the notification of royalty rates and dead rent in september twenty fourteen, there have
been major changes in the legal framework by way of effecting the mmrd act with
effect from the twelfth of january ' fifteenth as per the amendments, mining leases are
to be granted through auction'.
your lordships can skip that and kindly come to the next page.
'criteria for determining royalty rates'. five point nine. your lordships gets five dot nine question
mark 'in determining the royalty rate for minerals, the study group assessed the following parameters.
grant of concession through auction mechanism and imposition of contribution to dmf plus nmet leading
to hefty revenue generated for the states'.
kindly pause here for a minute.
now, there is a new insertion that is nine (c) under which every mining operator
will have to pay thirty percent.
of the royalty to the state which is being used, for the purpose of mining
affected persons and environment, not for general welfare of the people and my lord, this
national is minimal, but that comes to the centre. 'then impact of high burden of
taxation, especially in comparison to international mining jurisdictions'.
this can never be done at the state level in a fragmented way.
it has to be at the federal level.
then 'dependence on imports of minerals'.
my lord, sometimes what happens is, some mining leaseholders, they stop mining, which is required
for core industries as a raw material, so the country is dependent upon the import
of the minerals.
that is considered that we will have to fix the fiscal structure in such a
way that import is minimum and we use the domestic production at the optimum.
and my lord the prices go high.
prices of the end product goes high.
if we import the minerals, to be used as a raw material, the end product
in the core industry sector will go high.
that is the concern which can never be done at the state level.
then, my lord - 'sluggish growth of mineral sector and declining trends of its shares
in country's gdp. trends in domestic production and export quantities and prices of minerals'.
this is also considered that you are less incentivized to export your minerals and give
it to your domestic users.
'cost of mineral production, cost of transportation and handling charges, implication of revision of royalty
rates on revenue realization of the state government and in the industry'.
please see this, my lord. 'unused stocks of low grade, et cetera'.
your lordship can skip.
next page only two paras, five point one two.
and five point one three.
'one of the objectives of the study group is to devise a royalty regime which
is effective, transparent, stable, and is attractive to the investors to invest in the mining
sector, particularly for mineral like copper, gold, silver and diamond'.
they are using the word revenue.
royalty. but they say that our attempt is to ensure that more and more investors
come, and that results in development of mines and minerals.
my lord, that is the scheme, that is the architecture of the act. then -
'view of the stakeholders.
the study group has tried to obtain the view of stakeholders et cetera'.
now, my lord may kindly see, i'm just giving my lord overview of how this
exercise progress.
please come to page one hundred and thirty eight.
now my lord, they take one mineral.
'view of the stakeholders.
'the first stakeholder for this particular mineral is ministry of steel. can never happen if
it is fragmented state wise.
please see, 'was of the view that currently india has the highest rate of royalty
on iron ore.
that is fifteen percent of average sale value amongst major iron ore producing countries and
thereby having highest taxes at sixty four percent of effective tax rate.
ministry of steel made the following recommendations'.
i'm not going into it.
then please see (b) government of andhra pradesh. the main recommendation, please see (b) -'increase
of royalty rate to four percent from existing two percent on ad valorem basis for
limonite, colemanite, so and so and so and so'.
they take into consideration what fiscal benefit we want to derive out of the mineral
wealth which we have in our country. and therefore, they make a request.
and they give justifications.
and acceptance and rejection of request are answered in this report, with reasons.
please see, my lord, then my lord. then, please see next page, my lord. government
of andhra pradesh, iron ore.
they say this.
please see my lord. continue.
iv. your lordships have iv?
yes. 'continue existing rate of royalty for iron ore fifteen percent of average sale price
on ad valorem basis, irrespective of the grade of the ore'.
they say, our coffers would be enough.
if we get this much out of our mineral wealth.
then my lord, they say that- 'to introduce two new price for the low-grade iron
or etc'.
i'm not reading individually.
i'm saying that - 'every state represents, that you are deciding the fiscal receipt which
my state will get.
please increase this.
please bifurcate this.
please decrease this et.
cetera, et cetera'.
my lord, (c) is government of chhattisgarh. i'm not reading.
(d) is government of gujarat. they have their own views.
i'm not reading.
(e) is government of jharkhand. i'm not reading.
these are just examples, that every state participated, per mineral.
my lords, this is an exercise 'per mineral'.
because every mineral has its own economic parameters, and every mineral will have different stakeholders
contributing their suggestions.
then, please see (f) government of madhya pradesh. 'the rate of royalty on diamond should
be increased from eleven point five percent to fifteen percent '.
they say that -'we want something more from our diamond deposits'.
because madhya pradesh seems to be a diamond-rich state, my lord. then government of odisha,
government of telangana. then kindly come to.
my learned friend wants me to see.
show your lordships, telangana. 'it was highlighted by government of telangana, that the fixation of
royalty should be based on unit or volume instead of ad valorem, mainly for adequacy,
administrative efficiency, revenue stability, transparency and simplicity in monitoring royalty collections and reconciliation'.
this is important.
'it was also pointed out, that the present royalty regime, that is royalty dmf, that
is district fund and national fund et cetera imposes higher tax burden on mining sector
and is high comparatively with other countries relating to effective tax rate'.
they say that -'decrease this'.
because internationally, there is a low tax regime.
we have higher tax.
and their concern is, they might lose the industries which are using this particular mineral.
so, they have their own concern.
then my lord, next is fimi. fimi is my lord, federation of indian mining industries.
they have also participated.
but i'm not reading it, but this is a stakeholder participation.
now your lordships, may go by one or two examples of the minerals.
page one hundred and forty eight, para six point four. this is how the development
and regulation of mineral, is taken care of.
as a general architecture. six point four -'an analysis of the feedback given by the
state government show that, principal mineral producing state perceives royalty primarily as a source of
revenue as well as consideration for permitting exploitation of state mineral resources.
these states are also of the view that royalty is a consideration due to the
state government for allowing exploitation of its mineral resources, beside a tool of source of
fund for local area and community development'.
they say -'whatever figures we are suggesting is for our development'.
it goes in consolidated funds of india. it's not for growth of mining industry only,
it's their revenue generation.
it's like income tax by the central government. it goes in the consolidated fund of
india. this goes in the consolidated fund of the state. then my lord, the state
governments in general gave priority for increasing the revenue earnings from royalty as criteria for
fixing the rates of royalty. further, the state sought to consider optimum utilization of low-grade
mineral resources.
fiscal measures for attracting investment please i am sorry.
fiscal measures for attracting investment and mineral conservation as other important criteria for fixing royalty
rates.
some states are also of the view that criteria of fixing the royalty should be
to attract improved technology to bring royalty rates in tune with international rates for encouraging
investment in mining sector'.
they are saying that this is an all-comprehensive package, which we are deciding.
'ficci recommends that differential rates of royalty should be charged on intermediate minerals, et cetera,
et cetera'.
we are not concerned.
now, please see my lord, one example, kindly come to dead rent.
and i'll again show why how this is a limitation, how this helps development and
regulation.
what is dead rent?
let us, see conceptually what is dead rent?
i have a mine.
i am not operating the mine, for whatever reason, so i'll have to pay that
rent.
that is the dead rent.
why do we charge that as a concept?
it's not merely to incentivize them, incentivize the mine owner to continuously mine and produce
minerals.
there is one more important factor.
and that important factor is this.
your lordships are aware that mineral resources of the country are limited.
they will be depleted and they are to be exploited in a phased manner.
when i get the lease, i get the lease with a condition that i would
extract minerals over a period of ten years for sustainable development to ensure that the
simultaneously, the ecology is not harmed et cetera.
suppose i am greedy, or for whatever reason there are some market forces.
the price of that mineral has shot up, instead of ten years i deploy more
manpower, more machinery and more equipment and do everything, if i have to extract five
thousand tons, i do it in three years.
i would be harming the environment; i would be harming the sustainable development.
and therefore, for seven years, my dead rent would be so high, that i am
disincentivized to do in three years.
this is development of minerals.
therefore, i say the entire act is a consolidated, self-contained code for every aspect of
development and regulation of mineral.
this number two, the example which i have given.
i'm sorry.
yes. another one.
why dead rent and how it is directly linked with the development and regulation of
mineral?
every section has this theme.
suppose i do something in three years which i'm supposed to do in ten years.
it would directly impact the price structure therefore, a provision for dead rent.
each and every provision has been our ultimate goal of development and regulation.
but i am showing this to show, that every state also comes before the government
saying that this is the all in all package for my fiscal benefit, and this
is how you decide the package.
my lord, fifty eight.
just giving an example how this exercise is undertaken per mineral. this is not a
general exercise per mineral global analysis.
stakeholders are asked.
stakeholders give their details, their desire.
global analysis.
now for bauxite, after considering each state's request for increase, decrease change, in methodology, et
cetera.
the committee goes into, the global analysis.
'aluminium industry is the principal consumer of bauxite. world production of aluminium was fifty eight
million tons in twenty fifteen.
china continued to be the leading producer with a share of about fifty four percent,
which is followed by russia, canada and uae and india. four percent each.
global aluminium demand of so and so and so forth'.
i am not reading everything but they examined the global scenario qua bauxite, keeping in
mind the demand, request or desire of every state government for their generation of fiscal
revenue and one hundred sixty three is the conclusion.
yes, my lord. kindly see my lord. 'keeping in view the global consumption production trend
analysis of global royalty rates, increase in production cost, and future domestic demand'.
kindly see the parameters they are considering.
this can be considered only at the national level.
'that production cost has gone high.
future domestic demand.
the study group recommends that royalty rate for metallurgical grade bauxite be reduced to zero
point four five percent of lme prices so that net impact, including dmf and nmet
remains the same as zero point six zero percent '.
please mark, 'net impact', including two statutory levies under the mmdra. i hope i am
able to make myself clear.
these two.
dmf is one of the funds created under nine (c) and nmet is a fund
created under nine (e), so they say - 'royalty, dmf and nmet considering that the
net impact is only.
six percent '.
and net impact would mean whatever you wanted is given or not given for a
reason.
but you cannot levy anything more.
constitutionally, i will answer.
how can we say that?
but this is how the exercise takes place.
we're just by one hundred and ninety four, my lord. i'll not read this.
i can assure your lordship, i'll not read this.
but for limestone. cess et cetera.
which is not a tax.
and royalty, in any case is not a tax.
that's not the issue i am right now raising.
please see limestone at page one hundred and ninety four. one hundred and ninety three.
i'm not reading it, my lord, but every state had different justifications for increase, decrease,
increase, decrease, but eventually the committee, after taking into consideration, everything at page one hundred
ninety four.
my lord may see the bottom, then i'm through.
then i'm done with this.
'after analysis of data on cement price for the last two years impact of limestone
as raw material cost and its significance for infrastructural growth.
the study group recommends to adjust royalty rate of ld grade limestone to r's. seventy
from r's. ninety per ton and other grade limestone to r's. sixty from eighty per
ton.
so that the impact of dmf and nmet gets cushioned and absorbed for auctioned mines
only'.
meaning thereby only three levies are being contemplated.
the reason is this, my lord, limestone is directly used for manufacturing of cement and
cement is required for the core infrastructural growth of the country. what they say is,
we will have to cushion in these two charges, meaning thereby, it's very clear that
they are providing for all-inclusive fiscal benefit to each state.
are the states told by the study group at any point that -'look, in lieu
of your tax revenue what is it that you require by way of total revenues
to be generated.
so that we will take royalty fixed.
we will take into account your overall loss of taxing revenues'.
does that exercise happen?
we find only that they have said, well to cushion the payment of dmf and
nmet the reduction of rates of royalty in certain cases have been recommended.
because after twenty fifteen amendment they have to pay to the national mineral, the district
mineral fund and the exploration trust. district fund. right. but is there anything here to
indicate that the states are told that - 'well, what is it that your revenue
generation requirements are?
therefore, when we fix the royalty, we will take into account your loss of tax
revenues'.
page one hundred and forty eight.
if your lordships can come to.
there are six point four. you're right.
but throughout the study report, the study groups report.
they keep on saying that -'look, we have to cushion the impact of the dmf
and the nmet'.
meaning. therefore, because of the dmf, the states are getting this additional levy.
the investor has to pay extra, so that we will cushion that impact by reducing
the rate of royalty. meaning thereby, nothing else.
otherwise, there is no question of cushioning.
even they are going to the extent.
'nothing else' is the key.
where do you get that actually?
i will come to that.
just answering your lordship's question.
we saw that.
everywhere they are trying to cushion the impact of dmf, nmet. my lord, if your
lordships are looking at a specific, negatively worded provision, there is none.
that, nothing else.
these and nothing else.
because legislature do not use such language, but not for another legislature. a negative language.
they occupy the field and i'll show the field is occupied.
only to the extent provided.
exactly. i'll show the extent.
your ladyship is right.
i'll show to what extent it is providing.
in fact,.
it appears to be, if you compute the effective rate of tax.
the effective rate of tax, is the total amount which is paid to the state,
divided by way of royalty and other levies, divided by the total realizations on account
of sale.
when we see that this effective rate of tax is very high in india, and
therefore the royalty rates have to be so modulated.
that would, in my submission necessarily mean, that if you put any other burden, the
balance at the national and international level will be disturbed.
that's the only similar.
answering my lord, the chief justice's query, my lord, please come to pdf one hundred
and thirty six, 'criteria for determining royalty rates'.
your lordship gets it, my lord?
can i read?
my lord, kindly come to (f) and (g).
(f).
my lord, i'm not reading the rest.
first see (b), for instance, impact of high burden of taxation, especially in comparison to
international mining jurisdiction.
so does this not really therefore, seem to contemplate that, there is a duty to
pay tax to the states.
the burden is high.
no, no.
and therefore, we are fixing the royalty to modulate the burden of taxation.
no. my lord, the impact of high burden of taxation would mean, that, as per
the global phenomena, our fiscal regime, my lord, i'll use a general, i'll use a
neutral word, that our fiscal regime has high taxation.
but, therefore my lord, i had shown to you your lordships, what it includes and
what it doesn't include.
my lord, please, for a second, my lord, just to answer my lord, come back
to my lord, that high taxation part, value of.
mister sg, the query of our chief justice was.
yes. the very fact that clause (b) refers to, high burden of taxation, it itself
contemplates that states will continue to levy taxes, and that will be taken into consideration
while fixing the royalty. my lord, i am answering that.
my lord, please come to, one hundred and thirty two point one three one.
i'm sorry, one hundred and thirty one.
as you rightly said, royalty, though fixed by the union is entirely appropriated, levied and
appropriated by these states.
right?
now, therefore, when they are fixing royalty, they are fixing the price, which the states
will realize, by the extraction of minerals of which they are owners.
right?
that's the whole concept of royalty. also, dead rent, because you don't expect you have
to pay dead rent.
now while fixing the royalty, which is a realization by the states for the extraction
of minerals, the study group looks at what the state is already realizing on account
of taxation, and it in fact says, that because there is such a high burden
of taxation, which the states are imposing, therefore we will modulate the royalty accordingly, which
postulates again, that taxation is something which the states are imposing.
in fact, it's not the other way.
but look, we are increasing the rate of royalty to a level, so that you
will exclude all other levies.
that's not the approach of the study group.
my lord, can i answer?
my lord, there is an answer.
there are two answers.
please come to, my lord, page one hundred and thirty one at the foot. one
hundred and thirty one.
nor are they fixing royalty, to compensate for the loss of tax revenues.
it's there, my lord. i'm showing that dot my lord, your lordship, can you just
bear with me?
page one hundred and thirty one.
one hundred and thirty one? one hundred and thirty one.
how, my lord, the effective tax rate is calculated. one hundred and thirty one.
bottom.
your lordship gets?
yes. value of all amounts paid to the government by the miner.
mister solicitor, this goes against you.
if effective rate, if the numerator in the effective rate of tax, were to be
paid.
were be the value of all amounts paid to the government on account of royalty,
then you would be right.
no, no.
kindly. they factored in all payments which are made to the state. we try and
read in that way.
but, kindly read it the other way, that everything which the.
one thing is clear.
because the product of this division, the numerator and the denominator is so high, in
the case of india, almost sixty percent.
therefore, they wanted to impose a more realistic royalty regime by, in fact, reducing the
rate of royalty. can i answer that?
can i answer?
first and foremost, when this report is prepared, kesoram holds the field and therefore there
were levies.
there are levies, so that cannot be ignored by the study group, correct, my lord?
after kesoram, the state is imposing levies in some states. it's five hundred percent of
that of the royalty. so, it says, value of all amounts paid to the government.
please my lord, now turn the page.
that would get the answer of what the chief justice hold.
india fifty nine and.
fifty nine and.
that's okay, but note.
what it does not include.
first, he said 'everything which is paid to the government'.
but accept this, my lord, please see - 'etr that is effective tax rate does
not include a number of other payments, such as auction price, purchase of land for
mining, gstf eighteen percent, ten percent tax levied by the supreme court, net present value
in case of survey, net present value, compensatory afforestation, upfront payment at the time of
grant of mining lease'.
but it therefore does not include.
it does not exclude the state cesses, it includes the state cesses. you may be
right because of the prevalence of kesoram because when the study report came, you were
in the kesoram regime.
the states can levy cess. but the fact remains that this study group postulates that
the rate of royalty would be so modulated so that the amount which is realized
by the state's towards royalty is adequately reduced to factoring the higher rate of taxes,
which the states are otherwise imposing.
would your lordships come to a two-page thereafter one. five point nine. there are five
point nine. methodologically, the study group is not saying that -'look, we are now going
to give you an adequate realization by way of royalty, so that you do not
impose any other levies'.
that's not what they are telling the states.
one hundred and thirty six, if your lordships come to.
on the other hand, this exclusion clearly states that there are other types of exactions
which the states can do.
for example, in karnataka. forest development tax, or fdt, is levied on forest produce, which
also includes mineral resources.
that is the question, my lord whether it can be levied or not?
that's the question whether it can be levied.
but that's the question.
it is levied.
in every state under some name or the other, it is being levied.
but, my lord, my reading of this page one hundred and thirty one is that
how tax rate is derived?
all, whatever you are supposed to pay, state tax, royalty, district fund, national fund, everything.
multiplied by this, except a, b,c, d, e, which does not include, the exceptions or
deductions do not take care of state and apropos your lordships query, please come to
page one hundred thirty six, whether it is considered or not that, what is your
revenue requirement?
point (g).
i stopped at five (f), my lord but please see (g) -'implication of revision of
royalty rates on revenue realization of the state government and the industry'.
this is inclusive.
from royalty.
there are always two ways of reading it.
but what they say is that what will be the implication on the overall growth
of this and how it would impact?
i don't wish to take your lordships through every mineral- wise discussion what they say
is- 'this is the total amount which a miner pay, this mineral is used in
abcd industry.
this is the position in the global market.
and if we do not put the cap of total fiscal payment at particular point,
it would be against the development of the mining industry'.
that is how they are approaching.
the difficulty for me is,.
my lord, after.
i'll come to the act immediately.
but apropos this query, my lord, after india cement, when the state was not permitted
to levy anything other than royalty, they were compensated by the respective study group by
increasing royalty, so it is always considered as 'a composite receipt by the state'.
please, my lord, come to volume v. only one paragraph, page fifteen sixty nine.
my lord, this is that mahalakshmi judgment state of mp versus mahalakshmi fabrics. so, when
you are not levying the other charges, the compensatory.
volume v, right?
yes, volume v, page fifteen sixty nine.
it starts at fifteen sixty one my lord, but i am pointedly inviting your lordship's
attention to the relevant part.
pdf is fifteen seventy five.
i'm sorry, my lord. fifteen seventy five.
left side pdf page.
fifteen sixty seven?
your lordship gets, my lord?
left hand side, my lord, pagination fifteen seventy five.
pdf pagination, my lord getting that?
yes. the first.
'the controversy ultimately came to be decided by this court in orissa cement versus state
of orissa, whereby, such cess was held to be invalid and beyond the legislative competence
of the state government. it appears that soon after the aforesaid invalidation of the cess,
the coal producing states were faced with problem of refunding the amounts obtained by them
that far.
they, therefore approached the central government for help.
in pursuance to the state approach, parliament passed an act validating the cess'.
so that, they don't have to repay it to the government, repay it to the
miners.
'we are not concerned.
we are not concerned with the said ordinance and subsequent act in the present proceedings.
it appears'.
please note this, 'that since the state government had suffered financial losses because of the
invalidation of cess, they also approached the central government for help in the matter.
as a consequence, thereof, a working group was constituted in this behalf.
the said working group suggested an increase in the royalty to the extent of seventeen
percent per ton of coal.
the working group also found sufficient justification for compensating the coal producing states to the
extent of one hundred percent of the loss caused by the aforesaid judgment of this
court. since the recommendation was accepted by the central government, the impugned notification was issued
by the government, according to the writ petitioner before the high court. the increase in
the rates of royalty pursuant to the notification was to the extent of four thousand
four hundred percent to two thousand percent as compared to the royalty fixed in nineteen
eighty one on various varieties of coal.
it was further contended, etc'.
my lord, the point i'm making is, when they were prevented from taking any levy,
that loss was compensated in the fixation of royalty. and when they are now permitted
to levy because of kesoram and subject to what your lordship decides, the royalty is
so fixed that, it also takes into account that you are already earning this much.
because thus.
this subgroup cannot seek in appeal, whether it is leviable or not.
they will have to proceed, that as on date it is leviable.
you are earning r's. one hundred.
in other words, the fixation of royalty is not agnostic to what the states are
realizing by way of taxation.
because of kesoram. yes. therefore, my lord, therefore this reference.
it's just that the states are entitled to demand something in way of tax, and
they adjust the royalty every three years.
now, my lord, what would happen?
in practical terms, what would happen?
if, your lordships, hypothetically were to hold that the state had no jurisdiction, competence, state
legislature had no competence, to levy a particular levy other than royalty, dead rent, rent
and my lord. the thing that the government of india will increase royalties. exactly. because
that will, somewhere we will have to have, a national perspective.
my lord, we will have to have national perspective keeping in mind the global scenario,
and this exercise cannot be left to, my lord, the provincial interest.
narrow provincial interest.
narrow, i'm not using it in a bad sense.
but when i am deciding for one particular state, my lord, my examination would be
a narrow examination.
i would not take a holistic national approach and in any case, i cannot take
a global factor into consideration.
see, if a state is so foolish, as to tax.
imposes at such high rates, obviously the market will provide for greater imports.
if there is a greater amount of imports, the states will lose their revenue because
there will be no demand for locally produced minerals.
my lord, the nation lose this.
my lord, when import increases, that's exactly what my lord, i'm driving at.
that if the domestic production is less because of high taxation, the import starts.
that's what we are my lord, avoiding.
we want.
only give me a minute.
the state will never want to be in a situation where, by overpricing, the overtaxing
the products, it will start losing its revenues.
because if it overprices the product, it's also a matter for demand and supply for
the state. if it overprices the tax paid, if it overcharges, you know, obviously there'll
be a greater incentive to import as you are rightly saying, in which case it
will impact upon the state revenues.
my lord, sometimes suppose they undercharge it, they undercharge it and start exporting.
my lord, the idea is that national levels, on the national level, a holistic decision
is taken that our minerals, which are our national resource, are used for domestic production
of infrastructure and core industries, and therefore this is one way of controlling import or
export.
what you are trying to show is, exercise done once.
no. every three years it's done.
no, it is very slightly different.
i'm sorry.
we are not considering how the royalty is being fixed by the central government. we
are considering only a very simple issue, whether power to impose royalty is itself sufficient
to draw an inference that states are denuded from the power under.
please come to the act, my lord. i know, my lord, that's the hard.
suppose, in a given case tomorrow, central government says that -'we want to impose royalty
of, say, only r's. ten '.
they have a power to impose royalty of r's. ten.
so can you say that in the states can't levy the tax.
in a given fact situation for a particular year, the government may have undertaken this
exercise, of talking to the states, taking their feedback.
we are really on the question whether only because there's a power to levy royalty,
that power of state to pay taxes is.
my lord, i'm answering that immediately.
factually, this is not a one time exercise.
this is an exercise done whenever there is a revision of royalty, that is every
three years, sometimes, my lord, for five years.
so, this is how the section nine is read.
the consultation is read into section nine.
that is one.
consultation with the state to arrive at a consolidated figure is read into this.
now, please see section. metaphorically, just taking from what brother oka was.
my lord, my respectful submission, taking the example metaphorically, as the lordships said.
for example.
yes, my lord. if my intention is to occupy it exclusively, then he is ousted.
apropos my lord's concern and a very valid concern that market forces can itself arrive
at a particular decision making.
for example, your lordship said -give me a minute to answer that state if overcharges,
then state would not get the revenue and therefore, market forces would ultimately settle down
the issue.
that takes a very long time, when we rely upon market forces to settle down
an issue, the damage is done, and this is damage about our national resources and
damage would be national level.
the mistake would be or whatever decision would be of a state, my lordships are
examining this as a federal issue.
to use brother rishikesh roy's example, your submission is that because i am occupying my
chair.
doctor singhvi is ousted from occupying his chair.
no. i'm sorry, my lord. i'm sorry, only a minute.
i'm sorry.
i would answer.
my lord my submission is, there is only one chair in the room which i
am occupying with an intention of ensuring that nobody else, including doctor singhvi, occupies the
chair.
there are no two chairs here.
your lordships' example pre-supposes two chairs.
i am saying, there is entry fifty four.
fifty says if there is a law under fifty, you are out.
so, there is a law under fifty, the field is occupied, and there is only
one field that is mineral development and.
regulation and development of mineral.
so, my metaphoric example was, when there is only one chair and i occupy the
chair with an intention of excluding others, and i am giving my lord. why i
gave all these because i have to show public interest.
it's not just that state, centre wants to act like a big brother.
there is a public interest involved, my lord as fifty four, entry fifty four stipulates.
my law is not just for development and regulation, to oust or to be treated
as a limitation.
it must be in public interest also.
that's what i was showing.
that why this has to be done at a national level and not at provincial
level with some narrow considerations weighing.
your lordships are right, sometimes a wrong decision by a state to overprice may damage
the state, and after three or four years, the state may come down.
but what happens within that three - four years?
that's the question my lord which will have to be asked.
one other perspective is in the context of royalty, the central act or the parliament
is permitting the states to levy royalty, but what is the limitation imposed on.
not levy?
no, parliament doesn't permit me to levy.
the state is levying the royalty under the central act. it's not centre which is
levying the royalty. no. my lord. i am only fixing the rate.
correct. that is the only limitation on the rate.
no. my submission is, now examine that submission.
my submission is.
royalty, the states or centre?
state. so, parliament is enabling the states to collect royalty?
yes. but the limitation is only on the rate of royalty, correct. so that is
a constitutional limitation in the context of entry fifty.
that is their submission that the.
no, no under the act. i have to yet to convince your ladyship, their submission
is that section nine is the only limitation.
and since section nine does not prohibit other levy, we can have law providing for
other levy.
that submission is wrong.
that's the main dispute.
you are going to go to the act now, i suppose?
kindly come to the statement of objection reasons.
'the differentiation made between petroleum and other minerals in item fifty three and fifty four
of the union list has rendered separate enactments for the two necessary.
the present bill deals only with minerals other than petroleum.
at present, both are dealt with under the mines and minerals'.
that is the old act and my lord, your lordships can skip.
nothing would turn.
come to my lord the preamble. 'an act to provide for'.
provide for what, my lords?
'development and regulation of mines and minerals, under the control of the union'.
so, the act provides that the entire act take within its control, mine.
the development and regulation.
whatever is necessary for development and regulation of mine is now under our control.
your lordship is right.
section two says -'to the extent below'.
i'm conscious of it.
two - 'declaration as to expediency of the union control: it is hereby declared, that,
it is expedient in public interest'.
to borrow my lord, expression from entry fifty four, 'that union should take, under its
control, the regulation of mines and the development of minerals, to the extent, hereinafter provided'.
now, my lord, it provides for three things.
the first, is 'reconnaissance'.
i want to show that entire universe, so far as mineral regulation and development is
concerned, is now covered by this, and therefore, there is an occupied field.
but reconnaissance would mean, without touching the soil, by satellite imaging or whatever, one would
first decide whether there is any mineral in the land?
second, would be 'prospecting of mineral'.
so, there is a prospecting license regime, where you excavate just to find out, whether
there is any mineral?
sometimes you are trying to find out 'a' mineral and you find 'b' mineral.
there is a provision made.
then you have to surrender your lease and give it to the government back.
if instead of uranium, something else is found.
and third, is 'actual mining'.
all these three.
there are two separate chapters under the act. one, dealing with 'regulation of mines' and
another dealing with 'development of mines'.
and my respectful submission would be that these two chapters read with other provisions.
i have started with the act my lord. can i start after lunch my lord?
it's five minutes.
so that with continuity, my lord, your lordships can.
how long would you now take, mister solicitor?
one more session.
less than that, my lord, but i'll.
we had given one day for everybody to conclude, actually.
we have relied upon your lordship's kindness.
alright. but i think.
there is a rule of estoppel. everybody should conclude by lunch tomorrow, i think.
that will be a very fair.
isn't.
it?
by lunch tomorrow, everybody now.
by tomorrow.
by tomorrow.
we have to close tomorrow.
we have regular.
my lord, i would say something.
we are before a nine-judges bench.
any lacuna on our part in assistance, even for the other side i would request
that, if there are two counsels, let both give the.
and one more thing, my lord. i am going to.
i'm going to be doing without prejudice, alternative argument.
your lordship, accept these arguments, matter ends.
your lordship doesn't accept these arguments.
not going to.
my lord, what your lordships would.
give it to me.
all right.
after now, the solicitor general concludes, i think everybody can take twenty minutes, twenty minutes
each.
and then.
i would invoke.
it's more of a good thing, now, i think.
my lord, i would invoke the doctrine of legitimate expectation and estoppel. your lordship cannot
cease to be kind.
kindly my lord, take entry fifty for a minute my lords. during lunch hours something
my lord to assist your lordships and answering the query, very pertinent questions your lordships
have put.
my lord, this is my respectful submission, entry fifty 'taxes on mineral rights subject to
any limitations imposed by parliament'.
now, this is kindly mark, by law relating to mineral development.
what possibly we are reading right now is under a law relating to mineral development.
we are searching for a specific section in a law relating to mineral development.
in this context, please read it again, my lord, 'taxes on mineral rights, subject to
any limitations imposed by parliament by law relating to mineral development'.
there is a law relating to mineral development.
my lord, there would not be any negatively worded section prohibiting another legislature from taxing.
the word relating to mineral development, do they qualify limitations or law?
law my lords. made by parliament by law relating to mineral development.
right. so, limitation will have to be found in the law, not my lord limitation
imposed by a section of the law.
but it has to be a limitation in the law.
correct, my lords. limitation has to be there in the law.
no, no, not in the law.
that's where my lord, i think the other side is wrong.
by law.
by parliament, by law.
by law.
what we are reading is.
who should impose the limitations?
parliament, the source should be parliament. correct. what is the source to be found in?
in the law.
and what is the law, content of the law relating to mineral development.
kindly now.
kindly read the way they would like it to be read.
according to my understanding imposed by parliament, in law relating to mineral development.
we have a law relating to mineral development.
in that law where is the limitation?
which section provides for limitation?
so basically, three things, who, how and in what methodology of, who, how and about
what?
who?
by parliament. how?
by law.
about what?
law relating to mineral development.
i am grateful, but not in law.
that you have a law relating to mineral development.
what is that in law?
in that law.
no. but that law must really authorize, that law must impose limitations.
correct my lords. but not from a particular section, which we are trying to find
out.
that's the argument that even if there is no specific limitation, the overall lay of
the law so to say.
architecture of the law.
architecture of the law that has been argued.
that's the point.
before i take your lordships to the act. and you go one step further.
you are saying occupied field.
therefore, even if i don't impose any limitations, i occupy the whole field of limitation.
i don't think that you are arguing of.
which i will show to your lordships, that anything and everything concerning mineral regulation and
mineral development.
is an occupied field.
is taken into consideration by the parliament by this law made for development and regulation
of minerals.
that's my respectful submission.
now let's see the provision?
before that, only one answer.
your lordships, a very pertinent example of, say electricity that some state may enhance the
rates of enhance the duty on electricity or levy on electricity.
i could not answer on that immediately, but thereafter i thought about it.
if one particular state increases the levy on electricity, and the electricity is costlier, only
that state will suffer.
but if the coal meets with the same treatment -- the coal is required throughout
the country for generation of electricity -- other states will suffer.
that is the distinction between minerals and other.
coal is just an example because your lordships were pleased to give electricity, but any
mineral.
if i overprice it in my state, the entire state suffers.
sorry. entire country suffers.
that's a question of federal balance, and that is how your lordships would read an
entry, that serves federal balance, public interest vis-a-vis the global phenomena.
now kindly see my lord the mineral.
since you have read the statute over and over again, just tell us now which
are the provisions of the statute which you want to emphasize.
yes, yes, my lord. section two i have read my lord. please see my lord
the title of section four, the main chapter title, not the section title.
your lordships may have it in page five.
if possibly we have the same.
page five.
your lordships have?
general restrictions on undertaking prospecting and mining operations.
this chapter deals with restrictions.
correct, my lord?
yes. now, four is prospecting or mining operations to be under license or lease.
it is governed covered by the central act. you cannot do it.
no person shall undertake any reconnaissance prospective.
that's okay.
you need not read it.
we got the point.
yes. now kindly see in this chapter, section nine.
the way my lord's queries were in the pre-lunch session your lordships, may say that,
may consider them or may say that there is no restriction.
nine is an enabling provision that you provide for the rates of royalty.
but there is no restriction.
but my respectful submission is, there would not be any parliamentary law which would prohibit
statute, prohibit an otherwise competent state legislature from legislating.
one has to read from the entries only.
if parliament in the total architecture.
my lord, what is the total architecture?
then i'll come to only two sections.
total architecture is mines and minerals.
there are two types.
major minerals and minor minerals.
yes. minor minerals are localized products used locally.
its impact is not felt outside the state.
the act by statutory enactment leaves it to the state to govern.
kindly my lord allow me to repeat this, because this is the heart of my
submission, the mineral which has no impact outside the state, like mines and mineral, sand,
et cetera there are no limitations imposed by this act.
in fact, there is a permissive statutory provision that you decide how to deal with
it.
you grant the lease.
you decide how the royalty, the rate of royalty also will be fixed by the
state that is permissive statutory provision for minor minerals.
and it is done by the parliament by the law relating to mineral development.
kindly see the distinction.
that power conferred upon the state government regarding minor minerals is not because of section
fifty.
i mean, entry fifty or entry twenty three.
i'm sorry my lord. yes, my lord the power which is conferred upon the states
for minor minerals, my lord their source is not entry twenty three or entry twenty
five.
this act, which is passed under entry fifty four delegates that or leaves it open
to them, that for minor minerals, you deal with it, this act will not deal
with it.
now after two minerals, two categories of minerals, so far as.
but minor minerals will fall within entry twenty three of list ii. pardon?
entry twenty three of list ii. i'm saying something else.
because minor minerals.
because entry twenty three is subject to entry fifty.
the law made by the parliament that the state shall regulate.
it allows the states to regulate.
unconceivably, we are not.
i'm saying something slightly different my lord. i am sorry i was not clear.
out of the two categories of mineral, what the central act ought to deal with
all aspects is major minerals and not minor minerals, because minor minerals do not have
any intra-state implications.
right. and parliament chose not to occupy the field of minor minerals, right. kindly see
section fifty.
what i'm submitting is.
i'm sorry, before your lordship reads section fifty.
what i am respectfully submitting.
before your lordship sees section fifty.
kindly allow me to preface this argument.
entry twenty three permits the state government to make the law.
correct my lords?
yes. entry fifty permits the state government means state legislature to make the law regarding
taxation subject to this.
now please see fifteen.
power of state government to make rules in respect of minor minerals.
the state government may, by notification in the official gazette make rules for regulating the
grant of quarry leases, mining leases or other mineral concessions in respect of minor minerals
and for purposes connected there with and in particular.
my lord, please see one (a)(g).
fixing and collection of rent, royalty fees, dead rent, fines, et cetera, et cetera.
the respectful submission which i made was, the field of minerals, both major and minor,
is occupied by this act, but by section fifteen this act delegates the powers qua
minor minerals to the state.
right. so now, if we see the architecture and dot i quote m sorry.
yes. architecture and structure of the mmrda. if the central government wants to provide for
everything concerning major minerals, my lord what would be the consideration?
what are the factors the state government will have to statutorily provide for?
(a), all kinds of licenses, reconnaissance, prospecting, actual mining, royalty, et cetera, et cetera.
my lord, every field is occupied by this act, which is my lord, undisputably an
act under fifty four.
so, the field of regulation and development is occupied by this act?
yes. now my lord, may kindly come to a section thirteen, but the title of
section thirty.
my lord, please come to section thirteen.
my lord, one thing that i consider your ladyship is, right to the extent my
lord, that's even if it is not mentioned, the limitation will have to be to
the extent of the scheme, according to me, and as per my lord, other side,
one section should be there, that you are prohibited.
that's the difference.
my lord, kindly see the title before -- title under which section thirteen is placed.
rules for regulating the grants of prospecting licenses and mining leases.
this is how the regulation takes place under the scheme of the act.
and please see thirteen my lord, power of central government to make rules in respect
of minerals.
the central government may, by notification in the official gazette make rules for regulating the
grant of mineral concession in respect of minerals and for purposes connected therewith.
please see my lord, (e), (f) and (i).
(e) utilization of coal or lignite, including mining for sale by a company.
the authority by which mineral concession in respect of the land in which the mineral
vests in the government.
straight away my lord, come to (i), fixing and collection of fees for mineral concession
surface rent.
please my lord, note this 'surface rent'.
it's a separate category, and therefore it can't be a land, or tax on land.
surface rent, security deposit, fines, other fees or charges and the time within which, the
manner in which and the manner in which the dead rent or royalty shall be
payable.
this is all which is leviable and payable, because the act takes care of every
aspect of major mineral.
that's my respectful submission.
now please come to my lord, eighteen.
this will apply to all categories of minerals?
no. why?
no, my lord, for minor minerals.
all major minerals, yes.
that's what i said, it applies to all minerals.
yes, yes.
all minerals.
except minor.
in fact, chapter two, also applies to all minerals.
yes. in fact.
only rule making power is left to the state government, under rule fifteen.
no, no, no i'm sorry my lord. rule making power in respect of minor minerals
are left to the state government.
for minor mineral, yes, yes.
but all other provisions apply to both the categories of minerals.
correct, correct.
i was just looking at the definition of expression minerals it covers all mineral.
mineral includes all minerals.
correct my lord. except mineral oils.
so, it's not that mineral includes all minerals except minor minerals.
minerals includes all minerals.
all minerals my lord. but for rule making power.
they can make rules under section fifteen.
for minor my lords, but thirteen.
not only that, under section fourteen, it categorically says exactly i was coming to fourteen.
i'm obliged.
they do not apply to minor minerals.
only four applies.
provisions of section five to thirteen shall not apply to quarry leases, mining leases or
other mineral concession in respect of minor minerals.
these sections are not applicable.
four is applicable.
four is applicable, but the rules will be made.
who will grant lease?
how to grant lease?
what will be the royalty?
what will be the fee?
but according to my respectful submission, thirteen (i) is an all-inclusive provision which can be
subjected to levy.
it can be fixing and collection of fees for mineral concession, surface rent, security deposit,
fines, other fees or charges, and the time within which, the manner in which the
dead rent or royalty shall be payable.
this is a statutory provision to be made by the central government in exercise of
its statutory rulemaking power.
now, please come to eighteen.
i'll just show the title.
and only one thing.
if you go to section fifteen.
yes. similar power is conferred on the state also rule making power.
correct for minor minerals.
no, for royalty et cetera, also.
yes, correct.
that's what i was submitting.
the legislature was dealing with two categories of minerals.
therefore, if you see clause number 'g'.
it authorizes state to frame rules for even collection of royalty.
correct but for minor minerals.
yes, minor minerals yes, but that power is conferred.
i'm saying the same thing, that there are two minerals, major and minor, for major
the centre retained its control for minor it is delegated to states except these five
sections under section fourteen.
these rules for minor minerals, the parliament acquires and then delegates to the state.
that's all i am saying.
major minerals only central government and only 'i'.
these are the entries, it closes.
it is all inclusive entry, that this is all you can provide for and you
can charge.
now your lordships may kindly come to eighteen.
just the title, 'development of minerals'.
how do we reconcile your argument with the debates in the constitution assembly?
when they decided that it should be kept this power of taxation should be kept
with the state.
i have the debates also in my note.
it should be brought in the union list?
they specifically said that it should be kept in the state.
yes, my subject to union prohibiting it.
correct my lord. i am not.
by your argument, this particular act, this is the only act. parliament, this is the
only act. now this act talks about very many things and in case of minor
minerals, it talks about what is being given so far as minor minerals is concerned
the power to the state.
it could have also said that the power of taxation for minor minerals is given.
it's not said so.
maybe that is derived from fifty.
we have to see why it is not said so.
the parliament. fifty.
because of fifty.
they would tax under fifty because.
therefore, they have to tax?
allow me to answer.
allow me to answer.
that exactly i think your lordships are suggesting my point, inadvertently.
you're smart enough to take my point.
don't keep on.
fifty says power of taxation subject to the limitation imposed by parliament by law.
now, this is the law.
now that limitation is lifted for minor minerals.
it can tax for minor minerals.
so therefore, your argument is power of the state to levy taxes on operations regarding
minor minerals, is there.
that power is not taken away.
i'm not disputing that.
it's nobody's case.
they don't have or i am saying that.
no, i mean, they say that we haven't.
so therefore.
we are on major minerals.
so, states can levy taxes.
of course.
unless my lord, it is prohibited.
it is not prohibited.
tomorrow, parliament can even prohibit.
legally speaking.
why can't this logic apply, even to major minerals.
why can't this logic apply even to major minerals.
there's no distinction between the two.
yes. if your stand of the government of india is that.
your lordships may not ask me that question.
the answer is very simple.
the entire act controls major minerals and keeps minor mineral out of it.
no, no, no.
it is applicable to minor minerals also.
correct my lord. so, for the -- what is section four?
what is section.
it says that without license or a lease there can't be any mining operation.
correct my lords. and kindly see fifteen that what should be the nature of the
lease, et cetera, the state will decide.
your lordships have understood, i hope understood my proposition that four provides that without lease
and license you will not dot kindly allow me to read.
i'll just read first section.
section four (one).
no person shall undertake any reconnaissance, prospecting or mining operations in any area except under
and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a reconnaissance permit or prospecting license
or as the case may be, of a mining list granted under this act or
the rules made thereunder.
now this rule making power for minor mineral is fifty.
it's delegated power.
that's all i am saying.
now please come to twenty five.
eighteen title.
section eighteen, title, development of minerals.
your lordships have seen first chapter regulation of minerals. now development of minerals.
only section eighteen i will read.
it shall be the duty of the central government to take all such steps as
may be necessary for the conservation and systematic development of minerals in india. my lord
my power to fix uniform royalty flows from this.
systematic development of minerals in india and for the protection of environment by preventing or
controlling any pollution which may be caused by prospecting or mining operations, and for such
purposes the central government may by notification in the official gazette make such rules as
it may think fit.
then there are rulemaking powers.
correct?
now please come to twenty five.
i may read it closely my lord, a little slowly.
the recovery of certain sums as arrears of land revenue.
any rent, royalty, tax or other sum due to the government under this act, please
mark the word under this act.
the centre has no taxing power under fifty four.
so far as mines and minerals are concerned state has no taxing power.
it can be traced only under ninety seven.
this is a future contingency.
if for some reason in future it is required to invoke ninety seven, that is
residuary entry for the purpose of taxing mineral because it is under this act.
initially, the reaction would be that tax means tax imposed by the state government. no,
it is tax imposed under this act. the rent, royalty, tax fee or other sum
due to the government under this act or the rules made there under or under
the terms and conditions of any mineral concession may honour certification of such officer as
may be specified by the state government in this behalf by general or special order
be recovered in the same manner as in the land revenue.
my lord, it provides, whose taxation is the subject matter, the tax may impost under
this act. and who will exercise the powers, revenue officer. why and whom at whose
behest?
the state government, because states, in any case, collects the royalty.
there is no dispute about that fact.
so, my lord, this again.
my lord show that, tax, if at all or royalty, et cetera, my lord, is
the subject with the central government. now your lordships, may kindly come to mineral concession
rules?
my lord, please come to rule thirty one.
page number is same.
my lord, maybe at page sixty five.
i did not say my lord, law relating to mineral development would include statutory law,
including delegated legislation.
the rules also would be law for the purpose of my lord, that entry.
please your ladyship may see rule thirty one.
now my lord, after showing the architecture, i am trying to take your lordships' closer
to something very specific my lord, thirty one, lease to be executed within six months,
where, on an application for the grant of a mining lease, an order has been
made for the grant of such lease, a lease lead in form k, please mark
this my lord. form k my lord, is very, very crucial to answer your lordships'
question, where it is all inclusive.
form k, or in a form as near thereto a circumstance of each case may
require shall be executed within six months of the order or within such further period,
we are not concerned.
if it doesn't, then it lapses.
we are not concerned.
now, please come to my lord, form k. i don't think, my lord, in my
respectful submission, there can be anything clearer than this my lord. now form k, which
my lord, some part, mister salve had shown my lord, but i'm showing something else
other than what was shown my lord. so, this is also a part of the
statutory scheme.
this is a statutory form, annexed to a statutory rule, which is a part of
the law made for mineral development and regulation under entry fifty four.
my lord, please come to page one hundred and twenty two, my lord, possibly.
which part of form k?
k, k. form k my lords. one hundred and twenty two?
mineral concession rules, form k. if we have the same my lord?
yes. page one hundred and twenty two. one hundred and twenty two.
my lord, first is, names of the parties.
the state would give and the party would.
please come to the second recital, witnesseth.
your lordships are with me my lords?
my lord, the chief justice are with me?
yes. witnesseth, now, please note in consideration of rent and royalties, covenants and agreements by
and in these presence and the scheduled here under written, reserved and contained and on
the part of the lessee or lessees' to be paid, observed and performed, the state
government, with the approval of the central government, hereby grants the demised unto lease.
what is the consideration?
the rents and royalties.
further please see the recital, thereafter, my lord. but first five lines can be skipped
except my lord, there is one capital 'except'.
my lord justice pardiwala gets it?
yes. except and reserving out of this demise unto the state government the liberties, powers
and privileges mentioned in part-four of the said schedule to hold the premises hereby granted
in demise unto the lessee, so and so, so and so years.
then next, ensuing yielding and paying therefrom unto the state government the several rents and
royalties mentioned in part-five of the said schedule at the respective times therein specified, subject
to provisions contained in part six of the said schedule and the lessee. lessee is
hereby covenant with the state government as in part seven of the said schedule is
expressed.
part five, six, seven does not provide for anything other than what the lease stipulates,
which is what section thirteen (i) stipulates.
correct, my lords?
now kindly turn over the page.
liberties, powers and privileges, to be exercised and enjoyed by the lessees, subject to the
restrictions and conditions in part three.
nothing turns on that.
kindly come to page one hundred and twenty seven, part five.
yes part four.
liberties, powers and privileges reserved to the state government. does your lordship. this is all
that is reserved.
it doesn't contain any other power.
this is the law relating to mineral development and regulation, and i am reading this
as a limitation.
because my submission is, it will have to be carved out, out of the total
architecture and not one particular provision.
then your lordships may see part five.
i'm not reading entire part four because except this there is nothing left with the
state government. they can enter, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
then rents and royalties reserved by this lease.
your lordship has part five?
to pay dead rent or royalty, whichever is higher.
the lessee shall pay for every year except the first year of the lease, dead
rent, as specified in clause two of this part, provided that where the holder of
such mining lease becomes liable under section nine to pay royalty for any mineral removed
or consumed by him or by his agent, manager, employee, contractor or sub lessee from
the leased area, he shall be liable to pay either such royalty or the dead
rent in respect of that area.
then, my lord. rate and mode of payment of dead rent.
then rate and mode of payment of royalty.
please see three.
subject to the provisions of clause one of this part, the lessee or lessees shall
during the subsistence of the lease pay to the state government at such times and
in such manner as the state government may prescribe royalty in respect of any mineral
or minerals removed by him or them from the leased area at the rate for
the time being specified in the second schedule to the mines and minerals act. it
does not say that any other taxes, fees, et cetera, levied by somebody else is
covenanted to be paid.
then fourth.
the lessee or lessee's shall pay rent.
there is a specific inclusion, which according to me, also means specific exclusion of anything
else other than specific inclusion.
the lessee or lessees shall pay rent and water rate to the state government in
respect of all parts of the surface of the said length which shall form from
time to time be occupied or used by the lessee or lessees under the authority
of these presence at the rate of so and so.
now kindly see my lord. most important is part seven, the covenants of the lessee
or lessees. lease to pay rents and royalties, taxes et cetera.
this is very, very important this would perhaps answer your lordships question and may buttress
my submission that whatever is payable, contemplated to be payable and not limited is provided
in this.
clause one of part seven.
the lessee, lessees shall pay the rent, water rate and royalties reserved by these leases
at such times and in manner provided in part five and six of these presents
and shall also pay and discharge, please see my lord, all taxes, rates, assessment and
impositions whatsoever being in the nature of public demands which shall from time to time
be charged dot so public demands my lords kindly underline.
assessed by the authority of the central and state government upon or in respect of
premises and works of the lease or lessees.
property tax, revenue, public demand on the premises.
that's the only tax or rate or fee which is permitted.
public demands will have to be read with in respect of premises and works of
the lessee in common, my lord kindly further, with other premises and works of a
like nature, except demand for land revenue.
if my neighbour is paying property tax, i am under an obligation to pay property
tax only.
the only levy outside section thirteen (i) are these levies.
and this, in my respectful submission, is limitation under entry fifty.
my lord only last page one hundred and thirty five.
the covenants of the state government. the lessee or lessees paying the rent, water rate
and royalties hereby reserved and observing and performing all the covenants and agreements here in
contained and on the part of the lessee or lessee's to be observed and performed
shall and may quietly hold and enjoy the rights and premises hereby demised for and
during the term, et cetera, et cetera.
this is all that he's supposed to pay.
this can be amended by the central government and my lord liberty can be given
or limitation can be lifted.
i'll put it that way.
now, in this context.
solicitor general do have a lip reader also?
i think my lord, this is working, my lord, properly.
oh my god, all the effort to say things silently.
no, no my lord, your lordships were not heard.
i was asking my learned friend, this is separate my lord, i'm diverging, what justice
is so and so is thinking and your lordships, asked me the question, i thought
that this is loud.
no, no, no.
mister solicitor, a form in a statute can't really override either the statute or can
nor it furnish an interpretation of a constitutional entry.
the classical statement was by justice chinnappa reddy in lic versus escorts, where the statutory
form was shown to the court and say that, look, this is what permission means.
it means that prior permission.
justice chinnappa reddy put it very well, he says it was always said by a
judge of the andhra high court in those days that it is that, dog which
wags the tail and not the tail that wags the dog.
your lordships are right.
if the form is the only argument i have, but possibly my lord. there is
a very beautiful extract in lic versus escorts, on how to construe a statutory form.
my lord, if form is the only argument, i have.
.supreme court thirteen sixty nine.possibly, my lord the form i am reading, with section thirteen
(i).
section thirteen (i) says that you can make rules for a,b,c,d,e. what they want to
levy is f,g,h,i. that's the statute my lord. thirteen (i), is obviously a statute rule
making power.
and the form is not just form used administratively by the government.
it is a statutory form.
it has a statutory origin.
now, my lord, i'll read only three or four paragraphs of justice sinha's dissent in
kesoram. it is a dissent my lord. and apropos my lord, justice roy's query, i'll
read one paragraph.
it's in my written submissions.
the constituent assembly debates on this.
possibly, my reading my lord, is otherwise subject to my lord being corrected.
i have examined that.
my lords, please come to volume-v, kesoram my lord. page twenty two eleven.
volume?
v. kesoram dissent.
justice, sb sinha's dissent, my lord. page?
page twenty two eleven.
pdf page twenty two eleven.
para four hundred and ten.
does your lordship get my lord?
which volume?
my lord, it's twenty two eleven.
it starts at twenty twenty my lord. i am at twenty two eleven.
i'm reading relevant paras only so that i may not exceed my time.
i know i'm not testing the not patience, but the goodness of your lordships. what
para mister solicitor? four hundred and ten.
there are only then few passages from two judgments.
para four hundred and ten, the expression any limitations in entry fifty of list ii
should not be given a restricted meaning, as contended by the appellant. in fact, the
rule of interpretation that the language of entries should be given widest scope should equally
apply to the interpretation of the said words.
so read the limitation, limitations on taxes on mineral rights could be in any form,
including occupying the entire field of legislation under entry fifty of list ii by a
parliamentary legislation and providing for levy of taxes.
the mmrda precisely achieves the said objectives by occupying the entire field of legislation covered
by both entry twenty three and fifty of list ii. thereafter, orissa cement is cited,
just the last line.
i may read the whole.
section twenty five implicitly authorizes the levy of rent, royalty taxes and fees under the
act and the rules.
the scope of powers thus conferred is very wide.
read as a whole the purpose of union control envisaged by entry fifty four of
the mmrda is to provide for proper development of mines and mineral areas and also
to bring about uniformity all over the country in regard to the minerals specified in
schedule one in the matter of royalties and consequently the prices there is a view
taken by your lordships that this is a consideration while interpreting the entries also.
then four hundred and twelve my lords, this objective would be totally defeated by the
impugned levy of cess on coal that has resulted in coal produced in the state
of west bengal, totally unremunerative and uncompetitive.
the price of coal, so producing being much higher than the price of coal produced
in the adjoining state of bihar, up, odisha, mp and maharashtra as shown in the
comparative chart below.
your lordships may please ignore that chart.
four hundred and thirteen, the difference in the ultimate price of coal in the state
of west bengal and other states would thus be around twenty five percent of the
base price.
the submission of mister dwivedi to the effect that the cess imposed is not excessive,
therefore, does not appear to be correct.
from the aforementioned chart, it is evident that no substantial difference can be culled out
so far as the price of coal on dispatch vis-a-vis at the pithead is concerned
in as much as by reason of amendment.
then the court discusses.
then kindly come to page twenty one eighty.
twenty one eighty?
para two hundred and fifty eight.
on the economic front, the country has to compete with the lead developed countries.
your lordship gets?
developed countries.
global competition has reached such a stage that, despite adequate production of coal and steel,
the same are imported from other countries to india. this case concerns these two minerals
only.
countries to india. in the international market also, the quantum of import is going up
as compared to export.
the manner in which revenue is collected by the centre and distributed to the states
falls for consideration by the appropriate constitutional authorities in terms of provisions of the constitution.
it is not correct to say that while interpreting the legislative field, the court, in
case of conflict, would lean in favour of the state, keeping in view the fact
that taxes under different heads are collected by the centre and a part of revenue
is made available to the states from time to time.
this court is not concerned as to whether the centre consumes the lion's share of
the revenue or the same is subject matter of criticism at the hands of state
or financial observers.
such an approach would not only run counter to the doctrine of federalism with a
strong centre, but in the long run would prove to be counterproductive.
india is a signatory to various international treaties and covenants and being a party to
wto and gatt it is obligated to fulfil its transnational obligations.
if, for purpose of giving effect to the international treaties, it in exercise of its
powers under article two hundred and fifty three of the constitution had taken over the
legislative field occupied by list ii of the seventh schedule of the constitution, no exception
thereto can be taken.
while doing so, the central government shall give effect to the will of the makers
of the constitution and would not act contrary thereto or an inconsistent therewith.
the legislative fields of union and the state vary from country to country depending upon
the requirement of the situation in which such provisions are made.
although a lot can be said on the subject, keeping in view the fact that
our job is confined to interpretation of legislative entries vis-a-vis the parliamentary and legislative acts.
it may not be necessary to do so, but suffice it to, however point out
that, when such an approach is adopted, we would be more prone to committing errors.
we must proceed on the basis that neither the union nor the state is supreme
in the constitution, as both the union and the state will have to trace their
power from the provisions of the constitution. we should treat the subject with caution and
circumspection.
the interpretative principles, whether leaning in favour of union or the state, may, in certain
situations depend upon the subject matter of legislation, the importance thereof, and its effect and
impact within and outside the country.
both minerals and tea deserve more control only by the union having regard to their
importance in the national economy.
then two hundred and sixty one.
distribution of taxes by the central government in favour of state government is of no
moment in the instant case as the entire royalty fixed by the central government in
terms of nineteen fifty seven act is payable to the states.
the union government has nothing to do therewith.
if the constitution as a living organ is not interpreted having regard to the intention
of the constitution makers and in case of conflict in legislative field contained in list
i and list ii if an interpretation that leans in favour of the state is
adopted without a reference to the subject matter thereon or national interest, the same would
be subjected to judicial vagaries, which cannot be countenanced.
this is all my lord. just answering my lord's query, i'll just show two things.
a, the constituent assembly debates.
this is all i want to say now.
constituent assembly debates.
b, parliamentary debates when this mmrd act was introduced, where it is said that we
want to denude the state from its power and some propositions, i have quoted the
judgments which i'll not read because your lordship have dot except two judgments.
one is hind and another judgment on the question what is the meaning of an
ambit in the scope of the term regulation.
my respectful submission would be, regulation would also include a prohibition against any levy and
there are some judgments on that.
if your lordships kindly come to my written submissions, which is two (f).
my lord justice pardiwala had two (e).
kindly ignore two (e).
two (f) at page forty five.
that is my reading.
your lordships reading must be right.
but let us read subject to being corrected.
first discussion is on fifty two that is similarly worded provision that industries which are
declared by law to be under the control of the parliament in public interest.
fifty two of volume two (f)?
yes two (f), page forty five.
that's the list of dates?
yes. i'm not going to read my lord. i have just given the list of
dates; i would request your lordships to go through it.
my lord the purpose is to show that historically considering the very nature of minerals,
it has always remained in the hands of the federal government earlier and central government
thereafter.
your lordships have date the thirty first of august, nineteen forty nine?
my lords have it.
the entries in the union list entry fifty two, fifty three and fifty four in
the.
i'm sorry my lords. my lord, page number forty five, the thirty first of august
forty nine.
this is constituent assembly debates.
yes. the entries in the union list, entry fifty two, fifty three and fifty four,
in the final constitution, and entry sixty four, sixty five and sixty six in the
draft constitution were debated in the constituent assembly. the relevant portion of the debate, is
as under- honourable doctor ambedkar sir i move, that entry sixty four of list i,
the following entry be substituted.
my lord, this is fifty two.
present fifty two.
sri kamath, mister president, i move amendment number so and so, of third list, fifth
list week, which reads as follows - that in amendment number thirty five of list
i, in the proposed entry sixty four of list i, further words the control, the
words development and control be substituted.
this was not done.
kindly come to the next page.
doctor ambedkar, my lord, somewhere in the middle, my lord, your lordships will find.
that is control of the industry.
my lord, justice roy find that?
the honourable doctor br ambedkar sir, the entry as it stands is perfectly all right,
and carries out the intention that the drafting committee has in mind.
my submission is that, once, the centre obtains jurisdiction over any particular industry, as provided
for in this entry, that industry becomes subject to the jurisdiction of parliament in all
its aspects.
my lord, please note, this is entry fifty two.
similarly worded, that industries which are declared, by law made by the parliament to be
in public interest.
similar to fifty four.
and this is what, my lord, doctor ambedkar. no. there is one difference between the
two.
entry fifty two and entry fifty four.
yes. in entry fifty two, it is industries, the control of which, by the union
is declared.
correct. but in entry fifty four, regulation of mines and mineral development, to the extent
to which such is declared by the power.
to the extent, my lord, i'm.
there is a vital difference.
fifty four is vital.
wider.
please see.
regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent to which, such regulation and development
under the control of the union is declared.
it is, in fact, wider.
but they say that whenever there is a control conferred by an entry, everything falls
within that law.
that's, my lord, my reading of not mere, my lord, kindly see, become subject of
the jurisdiction of parliament, in all its aspects, not merely development, but it may be
in other aspects.
consequently, we have thought that the best thing is.
the control is declared by union, by the union, are to be expedient in the
public interest.
therefore, the doctor ambedkar say that, every aspect of control is then subsumed, in entry
draft entry fifty four.
that's all, my lord, i wanted to say.
now, my lord, may only allow me to show, my lord, when this act was
enacted.
here we are dealing with limitations.
pardon me?
here we are dealing only with limitations, the entirety of the field, once control is.
again, my lord, at the cost of repetition, i'll not.
when the central government takes over the entire control of the industries.
and that control will be all aspects of control.
it's absolute.
certainly. but if we try and find out, my lord, in my respectful submission, it's
a wrong question to ask and therefore we are not getting the answer, that where
is that particular limitation?
the answer is limitation is put by law, not under the law.
by law, the law itself is a limitation.
but i have already addressed, my lord. i'll not trouble your lordships with that, my
lord. but now, please, my lord, in this very your lordships are on this, see
my lord, page twenty three.
my lord, this is parliamentary debate when this mmdra work was introduced in fifty seven.
where do we get that?
page twenty three.
same my lord written submissions twenty three.
my lord only underlined part my lord, i have underlined certain portions for the sake
of saving the time.
ad malaviya, would find, only the highlighted part.
i agree with him that, left to ourselves we should increase the rates of royalty
further.
but the rates of royalty cannot go beyond a point.
when in international competition, the price element becomes somewhat against us, and this is a
factor which we cannot ignore.
the moment we increase the royalties beyond a point, it will have its own repercussion
on the total price factor and we cannot ignore it.
this was the intention to put the entire architecture under the control of the central
government. then this shows that at the time of passing state governments were urged to
look beyond narrow considerations because somebody objected, somebody from the state objected.
and two, the legislators were cognizant of the impact of royalty on the prices and
consequent impact on international market.
please come to page twenty four.
rajendra pratap singh, bihar, page twenty four.
only the highlighted, black highlighted part.
what we are doing in this bill is to denude the state of all their
powers and responsibilities not only with respect to the minerals mentioned in schedule one, which
is very comprehensive, but in some respect, we have even taken away the regulatory powers
of the state in respect of all other minerals.
this was the intention behind framing nineteen fifty seven mmdr act. that is my respectful
submission.
my lord kindly see thereafter santosh kumar basu, west bengal. only the highlighted part.
at the same time -- sometimes i wish the lip reading could have been a
course in the five-year law.
when they are choosing jury members, they have people observing the body language of the
juries, potential juries and depending upon how they are sitting, how they are sort of
gesturing they will say alright he is a jury to be selected for my part,
in my turn.
just in a lighter vein.
solicitor if you are privy to all the conversation which is happening here for last
five days, perhaps the matter would have been over by this time.
that secret keeps us going, it is only that secret with all of us.
that keeps us going.
there is still hope.
that was a very potent word.
almost divulging, what my lord justice. but what i said applies to mister dwivedi also.
i'll not follow that.
kindly my lord go through it, go through the entire parliamentary debate.
what it says is that we cannot have a narrow state wise understanding of the
royalty regime.
whatever is to be done has to be done holistically, nation wise and global wise.
that was the intent and purpose.
i'll cite two judgments.
page sixty two.
of volume v?
of the very same.
first is hind stone. i would read that first.
it is sixty three.
i'm sorry.
page sixty two.
one minute, i will cite the judgment.
on to page sixty two regulation and mineral development and in public interest.
i have cited dot six two.
regulation, mineral development and in public interest.
my lord state of tamil nadu versus hind stone. this is a leading judgment followed
till date on regulation.
please see only the underlined highlighted part.
we do not think that regulation has the rigidity of meaning as never to take
in prohibition much depends on the context in which the expression is used in the
statute and the object sought to be achieved by the contemplated legislation.
i have shown the object.
i have shown the context and in my respectful submission, regulation of mineral would also
include prohibition of any other kind of levy by anyone except what is stipulated in
the act.
then at the foot.
this is again a case on minerals.
therefore, a little closer home.
yes. kindly then come to next hind stone, which was referred in quarry owners association
page sixty three.
it's two or three judge bench.
only underlined part.
only underlined part.
the word regulation may have a different meaning in a different context, but considering it
in relation to the economic and social activities including the development and excavation of mines,
ecological and environmental factors, including state's contribution in developing, manning and controlling such activities, including
parting with its wealth, that is the minerals.
the fixation of rate of royalties would also be included within its meaning.
when the law relating to regulation which is the chapter under which four to nine
falls would mean thereafter, my lord, subsequent.
so, in regulating mineral development, the royalty/dead rent is the inherent part of it.
the state has thus before it.
state means capital s not the state government.
the state has thus before it, a number of factors as aforesaid, which would guide
it to fix, enhance or modify the rate of royalty or dead rent payable, by
a lessee.
my lord, similar are the judgment, my lord. i'm not duplicating, but kindly treat them
as read, my lord. in the name of regulation, can the sovereign function or the
sovereign priority to impose a tax be taken away by another sovereign?
if constitution entry permits, yes.
therefore. fifty permits then.
.intentionally, the word's uses any limitation.
it is not any ban or a total prohibition.
limitation would also include prohibition.
limitation means, i restrict you from doing this.
whether by a specific provision, again, my lord, repeating, or by the entire architecture.
my lord, limitation can mean even extinguishment, that i limit you, i restrict you.
limitation doesn't mean that don't charge more than one.
limitation is a very wide term with wide connotation, my lord. limitation can include, my
lord, i'm not on this matter, otherwise also.
limitation, i don't think, other side also argues that limitation cannot lead to prohibition.
it can lead to prohibition.
the prohibition is specific, or you have to see the entire architecture, that is the
question.
then my lord, page sixty seven.
i'm not reading it, just hurriedly going, taking your lordships through.
my lord, hingir-rampur.
my lord, i'm not reading it.
mister salve has taken your lordships throughout all these judgments, till, page eighty six.
page eighty five my lord, sorry.
eighty six, i'm not reading it.
this is my interpretation of judgments from hingir-rampur. now my lord, the last but one
point, my lord, entry fourteen, my lord, i'll just make two propositions, because doctor singhvi
is arguing on that, my lord, land at entry forty nine, my lord, anyway the
argument was that, if i do not fall under entry fifty the text, i can
always text under entry forty nine.
your lordships would recall that.
please see entry forty nine.
my lord, if the argument is true, we will make fifty redundant.
that is number one.
and number two, when there is a specific entry, general entry can never be resorted.
my lord, please see, fifty.
my lord, i'm just giving the propositions, my lord and not taking your lordships time,
fifty.
taxes on mineral rights, subject to any limitations imposed by parliament, by law relating to
mineral development. now, forty nine comes if they fail in fifty.
their argument is, that if we do not have the competence under fifty, then we
rely upon forty nine.
please see forty nine.
taxes on lands and buildings. if we have no.
i'm sorry to interrupt.
but i must clarify.
it's not that entry fifty doesn't apply then forty nine.
it is, entry forty nine and if that doesn't apply and you say because the
measure is minerals, there also, my lord, its fifty.
that's, it's a reverse.
not what you are saying.
as i have shown my lord, first of all, as i have shown from, my
lord, the sub-group.
my lord, this so-called artificial distinction between measure of royalty, namely, in terms of tons
or in terms of area, is now blurred, has always been blurred.
for some minerals, it is on tonnage basis.
for some minerals, it is on the basis of area.
so, it doesn't matter, my lord, whether your mode of taxation is the mineral itself
or the land itself, but the land tax on land and buildings is a separate
entry, not only separately defined, but the term land would take colour from buildings.
what it provides for is property rights or something, which deals with land, not anything
below that.
another thing, the very fact that for the purpose of taxing, you have entry fifty
and for regulating that very product entry twenty three and also fifty four in list
i, oust my lord forty nine.
this is my lord an argument of desperation.
my last-ditch argument that if i do not fall anywhere, anywhere, then i'll fall under
forty nine.
land and building is completely a different subject.
there are two constitution bench judgments.
one is at page eighty seven waverly jute mills co versus raymon and company. i'm
not reading it.
which citation that you said?
page eighty seven?
it's a page eighty seven citation is also given.
yes. nineteen sixty three volume three, scr two hundred and nine.
i'm sorry.
i thought.
the proposition it lays down is one judgment and underlined portion at page eighty eight
would be enough.
this is waverly jute mills. please see, it follows from this.
your lordships get?
underlined portion.
my lord justice roy gets?
yes. it follows from this that where there are two entries, one general in its
character and the other specific the former must be construed as excluding the letter.
this is only an application of general maxim. the generalis specialibus non derogant. it is
obvious that if entry twenty six is to be construed as comprehending forward contracts, then
future markets in entry forty eight will be rendered useless.
rest are judgments on the same propositions.
i am not reading, but i would earnestly request your lordships to just glance through
them.
they're really illuminating paragraphs.
but it would be unfair on my part to.
now page ninety one, 'nature of royalty'.
my respectful submission is very categorical and specific and i think we are ad idem
on this both sides for different reasons.
royalty is not a tax.
doctor singhvi may argue, arguendo as an alternative that is, suppose if it is a
tax.
but our case is royalty is not a tax for the simple reason that for
tax you do not need any justification.
if the government is taxing me.
there need not be any justification, but in case of a royalty the government is
parting with its sole privilege over the natural resources and permitting you to exploit it
and sell it, and therefore you are paying consideration.
it's not a tax.
these are all judgments, which takes the view.
there are judgments.
these are again occupied field in the lighter vein by the judgment, that royalty is
not a tax.
but i would say.
but in india cements, the question was tax on royalty, correct. royalty is not tax.
cess on royalty.
cess or tax imposed on royalty.
my answer is, my lord i'm couching my statement very accurately.
for the purpose of section nine, royalty is not a tax.
why i say this?
there is a reason.
we have filed an affidavit on behalf of ministry of petroleum and natural gas, for
petroleum and natural gas, which are also minerals there is a separate entry, namely entry
fifty three and there is a separate set of acts.
there are two acts.
there my lord the concerned public sector undertaking is taking a stand that it is
a tax, which it can take because entry is different and the statutory scheme is
different.
but so far as section nine is concerned and the architecture of mmdra is concerned,
the royalty on minerals covered by mmdra is not a tax.
if your lordship would like to write it down.
volume iii(g) is the affidavit of the mopng. my lord, i must say that initially
both minerals and petroleum, that is called mineral oil were under the same regime of
forty eight act, but thereafter specifically, even the statement of objects and reasons of mmdra
says that now we are having a separate regime.
therefore, we have filed this affidavit so that the psus can take a different stand
and that may perhaps be a justifiable stand.
these are my respectful submissions.
i have prepared propositions.
i may revise it and file it by tomorrow, so that your lordships may get
what are my legal propositions?
it is available.
i have also uploaded but during the course of the hearing i would like to
make some changes for your lordship. certainly. privileged to assist.
thank you.
i had also revised a lot of things which in the course of submissions, would
your lordships would dot may i give a written note of finally, as how the
matter was presented?
if you want to, but we have taken very elaborate notes.
very well. yes doctor singhvi. i have a written note.
it gives the civil appeals where i am appearing.
kesoram and others.
the numbers are given there.
i'll take your lordships through it.
at the outset, let me say this.
the advantage or disadvantage of a nine-judge bench is that, your lordship, though not on
a tabular rasa are not bound by any landscape.
so, whatever your lordship does is what is most persuasive or on first principle.
so, we will cite cases, but they are only intended to be persuasive this way
or that way.
neither seven judges nor five judges.
your lordships will find some useful reasoning in some cases which is why we will
deal with those cases in that sense.
secondly my lords, almost every argument of mine is without prejudice in the alternative and
assuming that the arguments already made do not succeed.
because if they succeed your lordship doesn't need to reach many of my arguments.
and that's the way it should be done because the nine-judge bench is laying down
law for a pretty long time if everyone is going to be reconsidered and your
lordship should have all the perspectives and should deal with them because you should not
really be leaving holes to be discussed again and then again, some new reference comes.
thirdly, my lords will your lordship will always keep in mind a general view, a
general question which i want to ask again and again.
ultimately, all this is being done, all these exertions are being done because of kesoram.
and my humble respectful submission, is my question to myself is that, there has to
be something very special about kesoram's correctness.
for your lordships to go in that direction or adopt that view.
because according to me, kesoram, apart from all that other debate about five judges, touching
on seven judges, not referring it to nine judges, but themselves deciding et cetera, that
is a separate debate.
my lords, kesoram, what is so wrong with india cements. and conversely, what is so
special and right about kesoram, that my lords, use a phrase, not irreverently, it says-
'the cat amongst the pigeons', on a certain corpus of law, which has been going
on and on.
and that question, whether i believe is not satisfactory answered, because kesoram really does an
ipse dixit.
now, my lords, i have done this, my lords, the other thing about nine judges
by the time we reach the third or the fourth person, we have to take
our original written submission and chisel them down, cut off what is covered.
so that's what i've done.
because, i've tried to chisel them into six propositions, which remain, and they are mostly
in the alternative.
they are right on the top of my submissions, which your lordships, i'm told gets
at volume ii(e), page three hundred and five.
i'm going to only stick to those six propositions, and everything, my lords, including case
law, my lord, relevant portions are quoted there.
so that, my lords, speed will be assisted.
my lords, will not have to spend dot i quote m told, my lords, is
volume ii(e), page three hundred and five.
it's been loaded.
yes. and as i said my lords, these submissions are not in any manner to
detract.
they are only to reinforce an alternative view.
and i think your lordships should have, your lordships, in a sense, forget what has
gone in the past and now my lords, kindly see an alternative view, to some
extent.
the first is, my lords, royalty is a tax and/or qualifies as an impost and
compulsory exaction under three hundred and sixty six (twenty eight).
in my submissions, i've pinpointed the paras dealing with this, b (one) to b (thirty
two) and the page is twenty one to thirty two.
so, your lordships has exactly where i've dealt with this, with the extracts and the
quotations.
it just fell as the mister mehta ended fell from my lord, justice nagarathna, india
cements. india cements, my lords, directly holds it to be a tax.
it then says, a cess is also a tax.
it's a tax on tax.
para thirty four, i'll come to that.
there's no india cements or kesoram binding, whether it's seven or five.
but what is my lords?
we see the intrinsic worth of the reasoning.
it's not wrong.
so, the first is, whether is, royalty is a tax and qualifies, and my more
consider second part of the sentence, impost compulsory execution, et cetera, and the test of
a constitutional article not merely a statute.
my second submission as well is, and i don't think enough of this weight has
been given to that.
a second very important levy.
it may be a little less, in quantum term, very important levy.
dead rent, is clearly of course, based on acreage, and being a tax, clearly a
tax, is directly occupied by nine (a).
not nine, nine (a).
the paras are given b (twenty nine) to (thirty two), (thirty one) to (thirty two).
this tax is a tax on mineral rights.
unlike my fourth argument, which is a little different, this is a tax on mineral
rights.
the third, of course, although your lordships dealt with it, i'm going to be doing
a little addition here.
entry ninety seven and the reasoning will go, my lords, if i may just summarize
the reasoning.
entry fifty itself recognizes a taxing limitation, by parliament. your lordships, will be looking at
the second part of fifty.
your lordships sees the opening word its taxes.
the limitation must include limitations of taxation.
has to.
otherwise, the section can't be read properly.
i mean, the entry can't be read properly.
i'm just summarizing my point three, because i'm developing data and just summarizing.
so, step one, entry fifty, recognizes taxing power of parliament itself in its own entry.
second, it recognizes a limitation on that taxing entry on itself, because of a parliamentary
superior taxing right.
third, it then says, that therefore my lords, i'll be excluded, it can only be
by combined application, because this tax you're talking about of fifty four read with ninety
seven.
because taxing is specifically dealt with in ninety seven.
now my lord's query which i will be dealing with, namely two hundred and forty
eight (two).
tax covered, otherwise not specified any of the two?
the moment it is specified.
two hundred and forty eight (two).
no. it's really formulating two hundred and forty eight (two).
that's the query my lords put.
two hundred and forty eight (two) is otherwise not specified.
entry fifty specifies a taxing limitation itself.
but, therefore, such a tax has to fall under entry fifty four.
it can't fall.
read with ninety seven.
an entry which has been forgotten, dealt with three of your lordships cases.
it cannot ever fall in entry ninety seven because it is tax which is specified
in one of the decisions.
entry fifty four and ninety seven read conjointly, read with the third factor a limitation
in fifty itself, recognizing the taxing power of parliament. the three things add up to
create this proposition.
that's why i said it's a little different, i've developed it.
this is three things.
the synergy of three things.
but if there is a limitation on the taxing power of the state. fifty.
that does not mean that the entire subject is transferred to parliament to levy a
tax.
it is my lord. if parliament chooses, as it does in section fifteen, to say,
for minor minerals, you, the state can do it.
it is different otherwise it is entirely with parliament. parliament chooses not to say it
in section thirteen.
entire field of levy of tax on mineral rights is with the states.
that power is subject to limitation, which parliament may impose by law.
the word limitation starts with a taxing limitation.
see the entry.
i'm going ahead of my own story.
just see, the entry. fifty says taxes on so and so, including limitations.
the primary limitation has to be a taxing limitation.
it is dealing with -- in fact, fifty is a recognition of parliamentary superiority in
taxation, apart from other things.
but in hs dhillon, this court has said, if a taxation entry is absent in
list i, or list two, then it can be entry.
that's exactly what mahalakshmi says.
that's exactly what five judgment your lordships says.
but we have all seen from the last two three weeks.
we are seeing the taxation entry in entry fifty.
my lords, with respect is that private law example very lose example.
wrong example of.
it's a circle.
your lordships know of in private international law.
it's a circle.
fifty, you start with.
fifty, recognizes the superiority of parliament, especially in taxation.
this last three words have been less emphasized.
that superiority of parliament in taxation then gets completely coalesced and developed by a conjoint
reading of fifty four with ninety seven because fifty subordinates itself in taxation.
qua parliamentary taxation.
what entry fifty recognizes is that the taxes on mineral rights can be imposed only
by the state legislature since it's in the state list. but while doing so, you
are subject to a limitation which parliament may impose by law.
that is not to say that the moment parliament imposes a limitation that whole field
is then transferred to the taxing power of the union. that is mister salve's and
mister mehta's argument.
i'm now doing a totally different, nuanced argument.
that first part your lordship has, totally occupied, et cetera, i am not dedicating.
that they succeed, if your lordship holds it this way, that matter ends my lord,
this way or that way, now, i am saying something in addition.
that's why i said this is separate.
one is occupation.
it clearly does.
actually, the rest of my written submission has the submissions.
i'm not giving your lordships those submissions at all.
my argument is that forget the occupation doctrine.
may i do it when i come to the third proposition, rather than do it
now.
if your lordships will read the entry itself, i'll develop it from there.
let me just finish the propositions first.
so that's my third proposition, and that is dealt with in para eight to thirty
two, pages five to fifteen.
now the fourth proposition is, of course, i must emphasize, wholly in the alternative.
your lordship has been dealing till now with mineral rights.
ask a simple question my lords: regulation and mineral development is the word in fifty
four.
if they didn't want the words to be different, why did they use mineral rights
in fifty?
the answer is also answered by your lordships. all these cases have not been given
meaning and importance by my lords kesoram, and many of them have been noticed not
only justice sinha, but in other judgments.
why is it that fifty uses mineral rights whereas fifty four uses, if they wanted
to give the entire space, the entire universe, they would have used the same words
as fifty four in fifty.
or they would have used the words of twenty three in fifty.
twenty three is a mirror image of fifty four, which is why your lordship has
always held denudation.
they use mineral rights because it's a very narrow area given.
so, my fourth submission is, your lordship should lay down in this judgment because we
don't come to nine judges again and again.
your lordship does not want chaos in the law.
the difference between tax on minerals versus tax on mineral rights.
the two are different.
your lordship will only lay down guidelines.
the division benches will decide whether the impost in question falls this side or that
side.
but your lordship must lay down guidelines because take a simple example, my lease or
license to him of ten years, fifteen years, one hundred years can be taxed.
that's a tax on mineral rights.
it is very different from taxing the quantum of mineral extracted on tonnage or sale.
that is conceptually different.
the language is different.
the advisory the constitution uses different language.
please don't equate tax on minerals with tax on mineral rights.
that's my fourth proposition.
my lord my fifth case, the alternative which is, again not been argued.
it is a clarification which is important from nine judges, that today we leave this
court after arguing all this tax this way, tax that way.
tomorrow my lord the states get up and say, that was the case deciding tax.
oh, but i have the power to levy the same thing as similar things on
the ground of fee.
now your lordship has held very clearly that if twenty three is denuded, then the
power eclipse dot not denuded, eclipsed.
then the power to levy fees on concomitantly in sixty six cannot be there because
sixty six operates only if the main power is in twenty three.
that's my fifth proposition.
that clarification should be clear that we don't restart the whole litigation on by different
names called some fees being levied.
if twenty three is gone now my lords why it is important also is, kesoram
has a loose paragraph.
with great respect i say so, all fiscal levies.
whether all fiscal levies include fees or not your lordships should clarify.
if there is no twenty three powers in list ii, there cannot be a sixty
six power to levy fees.
and all states are levying fees relying on that para of kesoram. one hundred and
ten (two) i shall come to all these details.
that's my fifth proposition.
how much of entry twenty three list ii is denuded is the question?
my lords fees can't operate, no entry twenty three list ii. identical language of fifty
four and twenty three.
the denudation must be completed.
and what will happen is.
i understand my lords query.
this is more the occupation argument.
so, what will happen is, the parliament, the framers use same language in fifty four
and twenty three.
now my lords parliament passes a law about a coat, a gown, a band.
it is then said that the state can tax the pant and the shoes.
my lords parliament has evinced an intention that we will tax only the coat and
the gown and the band and implied in its parliament's reticence and hesitation and prohibition
on itself not to tax the trousers and the shoes.
your lordship will not read the entry twenty three in a manner that if it
is exercised and you my lords, the chair example is limited valuables.
in lighter vein mister mehta seems to have taken chief justice's advice, he moved me
one chair further.
as he occupied my chair also.
i'm worried that he follows your lordships advice too literally.
but the answer to my lords justice nagarathna's very important query is that the occupation
is not that your lordship will then encourage piecemeal legislation by parliament and say that
you are not able to occupy because you intended to occupy.
because the intention of parliament is that we believe in our wisdom that only the
coat and gown must be taxed.
but the subject matter is the same that can't be disputed.
in entry sixty six is one advantage i have something to your lordships kind discretion.
sixty six is entirely dependent on twenty three.
now twenty three and fifty four, fortunately, have identical or virtually identical language.
then the denudation will not operate.
in my coat and trousers example on only how far the taxation has gone.
then it will not.
that's my submission.
and the last one, is very interesting.
i have a self-contained note which i may not read, it is about nine pages.
it gives ten fundamental reasons.
three of them, why there is no typo in india, cements as contended by as
found by kesoram and seven other patent errors of kesoram. your lordships, will see only
two two lines of that.
i will read out of those ten pages, one page, one and a half pages.
for example, kesoram says that- india cements cites two high court judgments.
but does not follow four other high courts the other way and therefore, india cements
is wrong.
actually, what india cements does is, it cites those two.
it cites the other four and says, we prefer these two.
a point which kesoram completely misses or my lords, in fact overlooked it.
alright, doctor singhvi, now.
we can now start one by one.
we are just at four fifty five now.
we'll continue tomorrow.
i will finish well in time, mister ganguly will get enough time.
don't worry.
who follows doctor singhvi now?
mister khambata will.
i, if your lordships permit, i would like to address for an hour or so
if your lordships permit me?
so, mister khambata, doctor singhvi then mister after me my lord, mister ganguly is there.
mister ganguly will argue.
mister bagaria. my lord, i'll take fifteen minutes, my lord. there is a.
everyone has to finish by lunch.
doctor singhvi we will give ten thirty to.
three o' clock make it.
mister dwivedi will get the full of thursday and some part of tomorrow also.
doctor singhvi, what we'll do is this.
we'll give you thirty to eleven fifteen.
we will give mr ganguly, eleven fifteen to eleven forty five.
mister bagaria, eleven forty five to twelve fifteen.
mister khambata, twelve fifteen to twelve forty five and fifteen minutes for you.
that's it.
only one thing.
seeing the nature.
allow me at least one hour.
otherwise, it won't be fair, my lord, on the submissions.
in dalmia cements, ordered by three judge bench, where they referred six questions and directed
it to be tagged along with this.
now my lord, my submission is i'm going to request your lordships, those out of
the six only one relates to nature of royalty. the remaining five can be kept
separately subsoil right who wants the minerals, et cetera.
so, i have made a powerpoint presentation, and i'll just take eight to ten minutes,
about six slides.
i have to show to your lordships. you want that to be de-tagged with.
i have to make.
.except on the royalty. on the royalty issue.
i'm not submitting.
and to save time, i made a powerpoint presentation.
i think that should be de-tagged, my lords. that should be de-tagged.
i have a similar request.
no, no, no.
subsoil can be de-tagged?
ongc also de-tagged yeah.
ongc oil.
so, you can tell us which are the matters to be de-tagged.
i think on this there should be no dispute.
mister dwivedi, mister datar and the learned solicitor general, please give the court master by
tomorrow morning, the list of matters which have to be de-tagged.
mr datar, we will de-tag your matter as well on royalty since we have heard
arguments on what is the nature of royalty, we can take a small note.
i've just a submit on entry fifty, as to what is this.
what i've made the submission on, my lord, i've said that the levy in entry
fifty talks of tax on mineral rights.
tax has three components: levy, assessment, collection.
levy is taken away by nine, nine (a), nine (b).
so, i've made a chart.
so only levy is taken.
give us the chart.
we have given you the.
one second, we've given you the bottom line.
all learned counsel have to put their heads together, so that you finish by lunch
tomorrow.
absolutely no question of going ad nauseam.
we will never finish otherwise.
this will go on to next week and we have another matter next week.
the other submission we are made in the context of mining lease.
my lord, mining lease is normally for a particular area, twenty sq kms, forty sq
kms.
so, we had drawn a map.
tamil nadu's goal is entry forty nine.
alright, we'll delink your matters mister datar. no, mine only on royalty. mining lease is
only entry fifty.
we'll give you five minutes to hear your arguments on royalty..
some moment.
i'll cut one hour from my argument.
allow me till forty five, mister datar. doctor singhvi, we have no difficulty.
anybody who feels that, everybody has to decide now, that well, who's going to take
how much time?
but no difficulty.
sorry we will not do that.
whoever remains written submissions.
mister dwivedi you start at two o'clock and you conclude at four o'clock.
give us thursday my lords, we will not go beyond thursday, my lords. your lordships,
gave me one day, my lords. but it's going to affect all mineral rights.
but adding zeros doesn't change the legal principle.
the principle is always the same, irrespective of the number of zeros and decimal places
added to it.
my lords, i have given fifteen.
can we give five minutes, my lords. i have counted thirty two.
my name is there in serial number.
if you want main aap sabko hindi mein samjha sakta hoon.
aap sab shaam ko baith lijiye, tay kar lijiye, do ghante mein, dhai ghante mein,
subha aap sabko tay karna hai.
bahas iss taraf.
two o'clock we are putting mister dwivedi in.
this will never get over otherwise.
thank you.
