good morning brother. good morning chief. so 501, what we were proposing to do is, that we can list this batch of matters on the 2nd of august.
and then 2nd of august, we will start the proceedings.
so that week we get wednesday and thursday and then continue it on the following tuesday.
because monday, friday.... can i give my lords an idea.....
only a minute, mr. ramachandran.... yes. my lords, since the lord chief justice and justice khanna were not in the earlier bench, just my lord for the purpose of procedural things, earlier there was a direction to file....
prepare and file a convenience compilation. my lord that is filed.
but parties may like to add to it.
the links are available. the links are available.
there is a nodal counsel on this side.
the nodal counsel on their side may have to be....
who is the nodal counsel on your side?
mr. prasanna. mr. prasanna, and.... it was mr. kanu agarwal will be on our side.
so whatever my lord, your lordships may consider fixing a date before which all parties can add to the....
so we can really say that they can do that at least a week before the hearing.
so if parties complete everything on the 26th, which is wednesday, that will give all of you enough time.
so we can actually say 25th, so that gives enough time now.
my lords there also may be a need to file an additional affidavit as far as the serial no. 8 is concerned.
so that liberty may be granted. we will do it within 10 days maximum.
may i say.... brother kaul, we will ask them, they can then prepare the convenience compilation, add to the existing compilation, the usual directions that the two nodal counsels will sit together and make sure that they prepare a common convenience compilation.
i wanted to ask, you see this business of additional affidavits, additional compilations, this matter was substantively heard when three of us were there.
and somehow at that time the issue got raised whether it should be decided by a five judges' bench or go to a seven judges' bench.
so there was a little diversion. on the basis of that diversion that issue got flagged and that issue was taken up.
i am a little if i may say so, at loss to find out what further compilation, what further additional affidavits are to be filed.
there is no change. it's a challenge to a....
it is only the union which has filed an affidavit.
our affidavit only reflects my lord the position post 5th august 2019, to which nobody would be required to rely.
in that sense, that has no bearing on the constitution.
that does not affect the legal challenge.
we don't have to.... and we will not....
in that sense file more affidavits. then the union's affidavit may also be disregarded.
see solicitor, what i apprehend is you will add...
give a post scenario. now those people will file another affidavit, because they have to give a version of their post scenario.
so what happens is in the bargain, it's a pure constitutional question which is involved in the matter.
correct my lords, correct. what i am suggesting is my lords, nobody is suggesting any further affidavit.
and you are not relying on that affidavit because in that sense...
that is for your lordship's consumption my lord.
not that other side will be.... one more thing.
i mean after we did this constitution bench on the marriage equality matter, until the last day we kept on getting additional submissions, fresh submissions, rejoinder submissions.
once submissions have been filed, we have to freeze it at that.
because you know otherwise what happens is right until the last evening, on the last evening we got a 1000 page compilation, which means you know, this is unfair to the members who are appearing, the members of the bar who are appearing.
it is unfair to the bench because you know we have got ready on the basis of the record as it stands and when the matter is being argued.
so i think everybody must now conform to the discipline of freezing everything before the argument starts.
we will make sure your lordships that that will not happen.
that affidavit should not then be taken on record.
i would join the as if 370 scrapping has really benefited which my lord then we will have to deal with it....
but really speaking, really speaking mr. dave, that affidavit has no bearing on the....
yes my lord, it can come on record.
it has come, it has appeared in press very widely today morning.
no, that can't be.... that is for the press.
that is not for us. kindly.... it is served upon everyone.
we haven't got it, mr. mehta. give him 10 minutes.
no, i am sure you will give.
i am just saying. my lord justice gavai's smile is telling.
as i always say my lord, bar also  judicial notice.
bar sometimes my lord tries and reads your lordship's silence....
may i suggest something my lord? which would my lord meet with everyone's requirement.
my lord there cannot be any reason for anyone on this side to shy away from the facts mentioned post '19. i can make a statement, both of us can make a statement. that would not be a justification for deciding the constitutionality involved. then it is not relevant. why, why... everyone should.... alright, we will say this. what we will say.... alright we will say this, that, the hearing of the petitions before the constitution bench shall commence on 2 august 2023 at 10:30 am, and shall thereafter proceed from day to day, except for the miscellaneous days, namely, mondays and fridays. it has been agreed that mr. prasanna, learned counsel assisting on the side of the petitioners and mr. kanu agarwal, learned counsel appearing assisting on the side of the respondents shall be the nodal counsel for the preparation of common convenience compilations. since convenience compilations have already been prepared earlier, should any of the counsel seek to add to them, this shall be done positively by 27 july 2023. the nodal counsel shall ensure that the convenience compilations are indexed and paginated to facilitate the hearing. all the learned counsel shall be given copies of the convenience compilation so indexed and paginated immediately after the compilations are prepared. the convenience compilations shall, written submissions shall also be filed on or before 27th july 2023. after 27th july 2023, no further additions to the convenience compilation shall be permissible and the arguments shall proceed on the basis of the status of the record as on 27th july 2023. the solicitor general has informed the court that the union of india, that though the union of india has filed an additional affidavit, setting out the perspective of the union government in regard to the post notification developments, the contents of the affidavit have no bearing on the constitutional issues which are raised in the petitions and which shall hence not be relied upon.... for that purpose. for that purpose. my lords, small, there is.... even chief justice, the synopsis i think they have been filed by both the parties already. just one second, justice kaul is trying to say something. yes justice kaul? my lord shall permit me allow to speak. just one second, justice kaul was saying something, because he is online. in view of the stage which this matter had reached, chief justice, the synopsis also had been filed by the parties. so unless they want to supplement it, both sides had filed, at least especially the petitioners' side had almost completed argument.
so the synopsis was already filed. so they may look at whether they want to rely on you know, somewhat altering the same may not be useful.
justice kaul says if you don't want to supplement from....
we need to supplement. there have been subsequent judgements which have come in the last 2 years which we have to rely on.
that's right. supplement if required. that you have already said now.
democratic parties. there are totally.... my lord.
any additional material which is permitted to be filed by the date so prescribed, shall be filed only through the nodal counsel.
the only concern in asking this kind of indulgence is, especially in a matter like this, the course of an argument, a perspective on how you look at a constitutional provision or even develop and take earlier or later, how they could be seen in a particular perspective will be matter for the court and the counsel to assist the court.
therefore to foreclose everything at this stage would be little problematic.
let there be a.... only document. mr. attorney general, it will become impossible because if people start filing things, i think this is now....
let us now follow this as a modality for constitution bench hearings that at least a week before the hearing starts, everybody is aware of what they are going to argue, and then you conclude it with....
my lords.... only one last thing which i wanted to suggest was this, apportionment of time.
i think that's very important. i would suggest that on the side of the petitioners you must sit down together, decide who is going to argue what point.
mr. ramachandran is leading us. the order in which arguments would be addressed should be given to us in advance by the nodal counsel.
likewise, on the side of the respondents.
and please apportion time between yourselves. we might do that before we commence the hearing.
on this side also we'll do. do that so that you know we can....
we've done it before, we will do that.
we have 23 petitions my lords on this list, of which 14 of them are the challenges.
the 370 challenges. eight of them are prior in time, which are challenging article 35(a).
those actually can evade the outcome of these 14, because if we succeed here then those have to be heard.
if we fail completely here then those become infructuous.
they are on the list. i have in fact .
you can hand it over to the court master.
and perhaps what you can do is, this can be added in the convenience compilation so that instead of taking....
at this stage may not perhaps my lord....
we have two all convenience compilations shall be prepared....
all convenience compilations shall be exclusively in the electronic mode.
there is a national.... mr. dwivedi, we'll do that.
we'll decide that after the matter opens.
we'll not do anything in regards right now.
your lordships, bookmark.... menaka just one minute.
awami national congress, the leaders were under arrest at the time the hearings were going on.
finally, they have been able to sign off on the writ petition if we file that we have a diary number notice .
no, let us see. i do not know my lord.
nobody was under arrest for three years.
why don't we do this. issue is of constitution....
dr. guruswamy, question of constitutional validity is common in all these matters, and most of them.
give a copy, just give a copy to the solicitor general.
she may file an intervention because to say that....
whether we treat it as a petition or an intervention, there is a common counter.
just give a copy to the learned solicitor general.
i have no difficulty. i am only my lord, perturbed by the fact....
and also an impleadment my lord. we just told you what to do.
give a copy to the.... i have taken....
my lord, i will take the copy.
there is no difficulty. taking a copy is not a problem.
mr. mehta, just one minute. it is an order my lord.
kindly see.... impleadment of a political party....
alright. insofar as the impleadments are concerned, please take it that we are not going to shut anybody out like this.
very well. but everybody will have to ration time.
yes. because once the first two or three counsel have argued the matter, then the others know what has been covered, what ground has been covered.
therefore, time has to be apportioned otherwise matter is...
absolutely my lords, we did it in the same sex marriage case....
shah faesal.... my lords, there is.... only a minute, only a minute.
there is also.... alright, one thing. the two nodal counsel, mr. prasanna and mr. kanu agarwal, insofar as the intervention applications are concerned, please ensure that the intervention applications are also given to the two nodal counsel.
you can prepare in the index, a separate head for the intervention application number, who it will be in file to and the arguing counsel.
so that, ideally if both of you can tabulate for us what the essence of the intervention is, that will facilitate....
only one aspect.... there is only one small housekeeping detail my lords.
in the lead petition, in the first petition in which i'm appearing out of seven petitioners, two petitioners have moved applications to be deleted.
those may be allowed my lords, and we'll give the amended cause title.
so now five petitioners will remain out of seven.
the cause title will have to change accordingly.
those who want to be deleted would like to be deleted today my lords.
what is the ia number? and who are the two petitioners?
who are the two petitioners who want to be deleted?
one is my lords, dr. shah faesal, the first petitioner, and ms. shweta...
that is an ias officer my lords, working in the ministry.
therefore, he possibly doesn't want to continue.
we have no objection if there are other petitioners and others can argue.
number three, shehla rashid. these two don't want to continue.
five others will continue. yeh number le lijiye.
numbers? one and three. one and three, naam ley lijiye.
she will be deleted from the array of parties.
the application for deletion.... 1099. .... is not opposed.
the application for deletion is hence allowed.
and we'll file amended cause title. amended cause title shall be filed within a period of one week.
grateful. my lords, it's my duty to bring to your lordship's notice, there is a judicial order passed by your lordships my lord, in this group of matters which says the registry is directed not to entertain any other writ petitions on these issues in future.
therefore, i was saying that she may file an intervention.
ultimately, she wants to be heard. nobody would object, ms. guruswamy to be heard.
because otherwise there would be many petitions coming thereafter.
you can treat your write petition as an intervention application.
i will not oppose the.... the thing is that, you have to be heard.
we'll hear you and so that in that petition you say....
otherwise many more will come. that's the....
.... intervention application, and shall be renumbered.
my lords because this batch of cases known as with shah faesal's name because that's the lead petition.
it's going to change now with his deletion.
i had a suggestion in these large batch matters, if you can just put it in re the issue and that can be the heading.
this concerns article 370. it can be in re article 370 because every time the name changes, very difficult to keep track of where.....
there is one petitioner who is already there to request your lordships to treat him as a first petitioner.
that maybe.... as long as that.... online, online.
online fastest finger fast, that i filed it first so it should....
, last time, my lord. justice kaul very aptly said that you are doing that fastest finger first.
you file it first.... we'll call this as in re article 370.
yes. with a consent of all learned counsel and at their request, the cause title of the proceedings for convenience of reference shall be as follows: "in re, article 370 of the constitution." 501 (i), one of the petitioners passed away .
we may be permitted to file an application .
somebody has passed away. one of the petitioner has passed away.
alright. your lordship. just delete that person.
a petition of this nature. naam ley lijiye.
the permission to delete so and so is granted.
the petition would abate. alas come my lord denied.
petitioner number 2. just write it down for the court master so we don't make a mistake on the name.
once you have the submission, we file the intervention application in 2019 also we given opportunity of it.
we've just said there but the interveners we will ration time the two nodal counsel shall prepare a list of interveners.
if there are 500 interveners we can't give everybody time to argue in the intervention application.
we'll see what to do. the time, filing of the fact petitions.
so we'll file later on the interventions.
alright, we'll see when it opens up.
the intervention.... will decide at the end how much time to allocate to the intervener.
we'll hear the main counsel first, and then we'll see what to do thereafter.
2nd of august.... 27th is the day for freezing all the submissions, pleadings, etc., and submissions, and the case law compilations.
no further pleadings shall be filed. and we have recorded the statement of the sg that does not have a bearing on constitutional....
of course not. so 2nd we will start.
your lordship. he wants to redraw an ia.
you want to withdraw an ia? why?
what is the ia for? for intervention?
so we'll give it to the court master on a slip of paper, so we'll pass an order on that?
intervention dismissed. your lordship may allow me to...
your lordship please allow me to speak.
yes mr. manohar lal sharma. your lordship, this is a petition.
subject matter, what i said first, notify issue by the three judges' bench, thereafter it was referred to the five judges' bench, and notice was issued also by the five judges' bench.
pleading was directed to be completed. thereafter, one judgment also done for some intervention application.
now your lordship, my name has been removed.
some other name is there. i think this is not fair.
mr. manohar lal sharma, this is already an issue where you are appearing.
but now, to obviate all this, you have decided to call the proceedings, as in re, article 370 of the constitution', so that nobody feels that he should have been or she should have been the first petitioner.
we will... there is an article here....
notice was issued in my petition very first thing.
mr. sharma, mr. sharma, last time itself i told you, you will not do it like this.
so please don't repeat what we had rejected last time.
i recollect definitely. your lordship. brother kaul, thank you very much for joining in with us online. take care of your health
