yes, ms. ramakrishnan.
so i was saying yesterday to your lordships, that the spoken or unspoken
assumption is that article 370 is temporary, lying in wait for the greater integration.
i am saying that the view is completely fallacious because integration
is not a measure of how much control the centre has.
what did you say at the end?
integration is not a measure? is not measured by how much control the centre has.
it is not a function of central control or power and
it would be pernicious to say that people in the union
territory are more integrated than, say people in a sixth schedule area.
that's not how our democracy works, and that's not how we view people.
so this assumption, that kashmir and jammu were not integrated even earlier, even in ayyangar's
speech, the awaiting is for accession, whether they ratify it or they don't ratify it.
but once they acceded, they became indians.
and in fact, even before the indian army, when the facts are
this, even before the sikh regiment reached srinagar, it was the kashmiris
of the valley who fought the intruders and many of them were martyred.
mir maqbool sherwani is only one name.
he was strung up and crucified as an example by the intruder.
hundreds of them. nor crossover, it's heroism beyond belief.
so we're not waiting for them to integrate anymore.
now at the point of that, at the point of accession, aside from when
the maharaj yielded, how much sovereignty, he retained, whether his pact is enforceable or
not, and the fact between two sovereigns, of
whom one was subsumed, is a different matter.
i'm saying there's a democratic argument to be made of shared sovereignty,
at the point of accession because political sovereignty vests in the people.
the people of jammu and kashmir became sharers of indian sovereignty as
political sovereigns, and your lordships have recognized the theory, that political sovereignty,
then trusted to the legal sovereign, and the constitution is an embodiment of that.
and your lordships have recognized in the indira nehru gandhi case,
that this legal sovereignty it's a medieval concept to call it indivisible.
it is essentially divisible, the nation state is an association
of associations and sovereignty, legal sovereignty is spread over various units.
of course, that case was considering the legal sovereignty as distributed among
the three organs of the state, but the principle is equally applicable
to the divided sovereignty between the centre and the state, because long
ago much has been said about the dual polity, i don't have to repeat it.
so what article 370 recognizes, is this mode of governance.
it is a shared sovereignty of the people of jammu and kashmir,
the merging of their democratic will with that of the rest of india.
so in that sense, there is a democratic
pact which has become part of article 370.
it has a constitutional recognition and guarantee.
and that is quite aside from whether the maharaja's pact with
mountbatten is enforceable or not, there is a democratic principle behind it.
so in my view article 370 reflects and incorporates an entrustment of popular sovereignty
to a divisible and shared legal sovereignty between the centre and the state of j&k.
just a second. article 370 recognizes. can you come again on that?
an entrustment of popular sovereignty to a divisible and shared legal
sovereignty between the centre and the state of jammu and kashmir.
and just as integration is not synonymous with
centralism, sovereignty, is not the preserve of the centre.
article 370 also reflects and recognizes the historical and
geopolitical background of a democratic coming together of people's will.
the will of the people of jammu and kashmir,
meeting the will of the rest of the indians.
it was really a democratic urge and many have spoken about it, how they
chose india over pakistan, although they were not given the choice of a plebiscite.
even so, they chose a secular and democratic option.
they said, here is a state which recognizes that sovereignty vests in the people.
and also, as your lordship said in indra nehru gandhi, that
this shared sovereignty is really a system of checks and balances.
equally it is so between the centre and the states.
so article 370 also reflects a system of checks and balances, central
power and the power of the state, state of jammu and kashmir.
because the people are never completely excluded from any process, although
they have entrusted their sovereignty, this is what the judgment says.
so the checks and balance system is what
expresses the political sovereignty so that nobody encroaches.
so article 370, in that sense, the will of the people
of j&k permeates every part of article 370, 370(1), and 370(1) survived.
it is not.
i do not endorse the view that the whole article has come to an end.
370(1) the concurrence and, i'm not saying it's binding.
what ayyangar's speech is certainly not binding, but it reflects the fact that
despite there being a titular monarch, the power of concurrence, even when there
was no state legislature was given to the largest party because it was
a democratic step and that is why 371 vote for concurrence and for
consultation, it's the state government is emphatically defined
as a governor, advised by council of ministers.
even the c.o. 272 says that. whether by mistake or what, i don't know.
so a governor who is not advised by
a council of ministers, is not recognized by 370.
and therefore any c.o. issued during a period of president's rule is simply not competent.
actually i checked.
in all of, in 70 years, all of five
c.o.s have been issued during president's rule or governor's rule.
one in 1986, and four extending the term of
presidential proclamation in the year between '90 and '96 .
what's the number of the 1986 c.o.?
129, c.o. 129. and what was it relating to?
it was relating to i think the power under article 249.
it was a temporary approach and it was challenged, but it was never tested.
what i want to say this has never been tested for constitutionality.
it was challenged in the delhi high court, but eventually it was dismissed as infructuous.
so there is no ruling.
so despite the peremptory terms of article 370, whether a non-responsible government,
government not responsible to the state legislature could exercise this power of
concurrence has never been tested and i'm saying it cannot be done.
i can hand over the five c.o.'s, it's there.
and therefore, article 356 which is not covered by a non obstante clause, 370
is, its special term that sui generis power to the state government is a
power and it is not a function that
can be taken over by the central government.
function is a duty. power is a discretion.
it is sui generis power given to a state, a
responsible state government, and consciously given to a responsible state government.
it cannot be taken over under article 356, which
is subservient to article 370 on the sheer terms.
and even a responsible state government's consent will
not suffice for changing the terms of the article.
it has to emanate directly from a constituent assembly.
a constituent assembly signifies an exclusive agency.
exclusively devoted and representative of the people of jammu and kashmir, fully and exclusively.
so if a change has to occur, it has to occur
by an emanate, the recommendation has to emanate from an agency
which is equal and mandate in stature to a constituent assembly.
this is how the will of the people of jammu and
kashmir on a principle of shared sovereignty is reflected in article 370.
and that agency which must be equal.
see today, there is no constituent assembly.
after '57, there is no such agency on the horizon. if it has
to be contrived, it will either be through political will, as they say,
the hour. if i may paraphrase, the hour may produce the means, else
where it can be contrived in terms of the existing constitution, i do
not think article 368 will apply. because the terms of article 370 is
this article and article 1 will apply. so the limitations are there in
the article itself, but whether it applies or not, that's not what has been done.
some thought and sensitivity and democratic stirrings are required
to think of an agency which could express this well.
but one thing is clear it cannot be any agency or dissent.
it cannot be because the democratic pact is between two power centres of sovereignty.
and this is not as though they're setting up their wills against indian sovereignty.
as part of indian sovereignty there's a checks
and balances system with the state and the centre.
so how can the centre exercise the power which has been given to the states?
on the face of it, it is absurd.
so the constitutional intent is clear. it cannot be any agency of the centre.
people, the will of the people of the jammu and kashmir
is integral to the mode of governance specified in article 370.
and a process which is systematically with mal-intent, erase the
will of the people, can never legitimately affect article 370.
and their will had been systematically erased in this fashion.
i'll quickly give the run up.
20th of june, the governor's rule is imposed because one.
and itis stated in the order that because one party has
withdrawn and no other political party is ready to form the government.
this is why the governor's rule was imposed.
not because of anything else. not because there was security issue.
not because the state was in any danger.
because no political party was willing to form the government.
then what earthly reason had the governor to dissolve the house within
30 minutes, of two agencies saying we are ready to form the government?
two political parties. one a letter, what page is it?
i am not going to read it, in the, in the writ petition compilation.
mr. sibal has already taken us through it.
yes, i don't want to read it again.
so 56 out of 87 mps, stake a claim.
the governor is not there.
we cannot determine where the governor is, but we can inform you.
it is on record that the secretary has acknowledged the whatsapp message.
he does not answer the phone. fax doesn't go through.
he is informed on whatsapp and a public tweet tagging the governor, is issued.
by 08:16 this is done and by 08:57,
we are notified that the house has been dissolved.
what earthly reason has the governor to dissolve a house, when the governor's
rule was imposed only because no political party was ready to stake a claim?
and when political parties are ready and willing to stake a claim, what
business does the governor to say, i'm not here, i'm not there ?
then in this state of affairs, there is a proclamation of president's rule
and the president usurps the power of the state government under article 371.
it is not permissible under article 356, because it only
allows them to take over the functions of a state
government, not sui generis powers, protected by a non obstante clause.
and what need does the power?
he has executive power to do whatever has to be done
on a regular basis in a state government and temporary legislative powers.
where is the need for this extraordinary power?
it is not contemplated.
and then we are told, the situation was not okay for elections to be held.
that means that situation must only be attributed to the governor and the
president, because until then the reason was that no political party is coming forth.
with this i'll finish.
so this is malice, and this power under article 356, which is really
subject, legislative act there a subject to a post appraisal by the state legislature.
this power is ironically used to destroy all possibility of a legislature.
so the people of jammu and kashmir don't have a legislature
when the act is contemplated of abrogating article 370 and it
has ensured that they do not have any future legislature either.
and my friends, want your lordships to believe that this is
an expression of the will of the people of jammu and kashmir.
my lords, this is, self-proclaimed agent through a series of proxies, strangling
the principle and telling your lordship, this is not murder but suicide.
this is really that.
and this c.o. 272 is not only legally untenable because of
what i said about article 371 and the sui generis power.
only one page, i want your lordships to see.
there is this public functionary, volume 13, page 435.
of the documents? just one second. here is a governor, who gives video interviews.
i'm aware that strictly a newspaper report is not evidence.
it is not evidence, in the sense that
you cannot base the criminal conviction on it.
but when a public functionary former. what is this?
what is this at page.
this is an interview given, a video interview given by the
governor, who had dissolved the assembly, not the person who imposed
governor's rule, and also it's supposed to have given concurrence for c.o. 272.
this is an interview he gave to .
why i am interrupting. it's part of the compilation.
this is an impleadment filed in 22nd, 22.
never listed, for the first time being listed, therefore i'm asking my lord.
yes. which part do you want us to see?
i just want to read from the middle.
so, karan thapar, 'so really, you had no idea.' he had no idea on
the night of august 4 what was coming, and he had given concurrence like this.
satyapal malik, 'absolutely nothing. i did not know anything. i was merely called by
the home minister one day prior, saying satya pal,i'm sending a letter tomorrow morning.
please get it passed by a committee for 11:00 tomorrow and send it to
me. ' the whole world is aware of this. we cannot sit in an
ivory tower and behave it never happened. post facto statement. post facto, i post
facto statement? only at that level your lordship may consider it as post facto
statement. obviously, before that he didn't even know, he could not have issued a statement.
so this is people's will. only two other points.
this, your lordship will have to see article 370, c.o. 272.
it is true that in 1950, just two points and i'll finish.
c.o. in 1954, when the constituent assembly was functioning and also doubling
at the legislative assembly, for a brief while there was a c.o.
saying references to the legislative assembly in the constitution would be read
as including a reference to the constituent assembly of jammu and kashmir.
that was a situation where this made sense because there
was a corresponding body which was functioning as a legislative assembly.
this was in 1954? ms. nitya, this was in 1954, you said?
yes. yes, there was a c.o. which page 18.
volume? documents volume 3, page 18. sorry, tell me again.
documents volume 3, pdf page 18. c.o. 54?
c.o. 54. c.o. 48 in 1950. sorry c. o. 48 in 1950.
let's just see that for a second.
so that said, my friends are relying on it, saying
it was done then and they can do it now.
let's, to appreciate your submission. references. one second.
references. references. what is the page number?
page number, internal page number 18. pdf page 18.
pdf page? 18. 1-8? 1-8. oh 1-8.
this was the, with reference to article 367?
yes, it was done under article 367.
so they are saying it's been done before and we can do it again.
and i'll tell your lordships why that's completely fallacious.
which clause is that?
sub-clause 4(d), references to the legislature or legislative assembly of the said state
shall be construed as including references to the constituent assembly of the said state.
just one second. was this withdrawn later on?
yes, it was temporary and then it was changed.
once the constituent assembly stopped, then it was just legislative assembly.
was there a c.o. issued? yes, there's a c.o. issued.
c.o. 1958 removed. 1958 would be post constituent assembly to that.
yes. there was no constituent assembly in that.
so. till the constituent assembly was there, this concept of 4(d) was available?
yes. removal is at page 26, your lordships may note that.
what is the c.o. number? c.o. 56 in 1958.
i'm saying that makes sense because there was a
constituent assembly functioning, which doubled as a legislative assembly.
what they had done now, my point is.
i'm sorry. what is the page number of c.o. number 56?
28. 26. 26. this will be clause 7(c) is it?
in para 14 relating to part 19, c
in clause c, sub-clause d shall be omitted.
yes.
but what they've done by way of c.o. 272, aside from the argument
that they could not have done it because there was no power under
371, with the centre or with the governor the absurdity, you see, it
is as an exercise under article 367, it leads to a semantic absurdity.
now, i'll tell your lordship why.
your lordship will just take a look at article 370.
i know your lordships have read it many, many times.
i just want to show. now sub-clause.
clause 3.
it says, provided that the recommendation of the constituent
assembly of the state referred to in clause 2.
and clause 2, refers to a constituent assembly for
the purpose of framing the constitution of the state.
now i am making an argument on pure elementary logic.
there is a reference to a constituent assembly as referred to in clause
2, clause 2 remains on the book for reference and it refers to
a constituent assembly for the purpose of framing a constitution of the state.
so there is a relationship of identity between what the constituent
assembly in clause 3 and the constituent assembly in clause 2.
a is a. and so long as these two remain on the book you
cannot now bring by way of an interpretation that a in 3 is not
a. because what c.o. 272 says, in clause 3 alone, even what is referred
to in clause 2, becomes something else, non a. so long as this is
there in for reference you can't include clause 2 and say it means something else.
it's a logical absurdity. it's a semantic absurdity.
it cannot.
a is either a. a cannot be a and not a at the same time.
but that's what they're trying to. alright, this point we've got.
otherwise, the only way this exercise would have been valid is,
if they had, in fact what they have attempted to do
is that they removed all these words and substituted legislative assembly for it.
in actual effect, that's what they have intended to do which is an amendment.
it cannot be an interpretation.
and aside from that, even otherwise a equals not a, constituent assembly
is not constituent assembly, governor who should act on the advice of
council of ministers equals governor who is bereft of a council of
ministers, the entire exercise, my lords is full of carrollian, lewis carrol parallels.
the whole thing is an exercise and absurdity.
all right, thank you.
one last and i have referred to humpty-dumpty, i don't want to read it again.
changing meanings after the event, that is it.
and one last thing, i want to tell your lordships, that this argument,
even if jammu and kashmir flows with milk and honey, the argument that
in order to secure people their constitutional rights and development, we have to
destroy their entity, we have to destroy their statehood, that is the argument taken.
and that cannot be countenance regardless of anything.
and one other, which is not a legal submission and i'm not referring to facts.
i'm winding up with this. in october 2019, with a friend, i visited the valley.
and i was able to do it because i'm
used to traveling unobtrusively, not because people were not stopped.
the one name that resonates in the valley, with faith, is that of mahatma gandhi.
they remember him as a man who lived and died for his words.
somewhere, that legacy will be kept in mind while deciding this matter.
that's all. thank you, ms. ramakrishnan. dr. guruswamy?
you have a formulation, dr. guruswamy, do you have
a formulation on paper what you're going to be submitting?
i'm sorry, my lord? you have a formulation on what you're going to be submitting?
yes, my lord. let's have a look at it.
we've submitted the notes my lord.
i think it's page 4 to 5 of your compilation, volume 5.
page, 4 to 5, volume 5. it's a two page note.
my lords have it? yes. my lords, justice surya kant has it?
yes, page 4. yes my lords.
my lords, yesterday, my lord the chief justice had posed a question to mr.
dwivedi, that can you look to the statement of a drafter, a member of
the constituent assembly and accord it as being enforceable on the will of the people.
and it was a very important question.
it's volume 5, which only has the one pager
or two pages that your lordship had asked for yesterday.
yes. so it should be 15-20 pages between all of us, my lords.
not just me, justice khanna, between all of us.
i saw that look of shock and horror on justice khanna's face.
yes. it will be my effort neither to shock nor horrify my lords.
so this was a question posed by my lord, the chief justice yesterday.
and it's a particularly important question, because one, and i'll just formulate the proposition.
because one, in this case you have not one, but two constituent bodies.
so in many ways, it is unique to india's constitutional founding,
because it is the only state with its own distinctive constituent assembly.
two, it forces upon us this seminal constitutional question, can the constitution
of india be altered in ways, opposed to her founder's constitutional intention?
and i'm not saying a drafter's opinion, i'm
not saying a debate within the constituent assembly.
i am saying, can it be altered in ways opposed to her founder's constitutional intention?
when we think of this country's founding at a time of
partition from 46 to 49, our constituent assembly is drafting our constitution.
at the same time we know what is happening in jammu and kashmir.
ms. ramakrishnan, allured to that.
a country's first prime minister, giving his speech in hindi, said, we are a
nation, whose land is strewn with blood, khoon se ranga hua hai yeh zameen.
that is our constitutional founding.
so my first proposition is this, there are certain seminal
founding moments for any constitution, but more specifically, indian constitutionalism.
why are those seminal founding moments important, crucial,
significant while interpreting the constitutions as your lordships will?
it is because my lords have walked the path of transformative and expansive
constitutional interpretation and your jurisprudential moorings, with great respect, derive their legitimacy, their
integrity and their intellectual rigor from these founding moments, from our drafters' constitutional intention.
if my lords had chosen, since the 1970s, a different path of minimalist interpretation,
of limited review, then we would not have to worry about constitutional founding moments.
but your lordships have embarked on this methodology of expansive and transformative constitutionalism and
thank heavens for that, because that goes back to the needs of our difficult founding.
the creation of this country, two constituent assemblies, and also the
unique brand of federalism that was envisaged by our founders for
the state of jammu and kashmir, integrated with the union of india.
and it's not just article 1 and article
370, which is part of that constitutional intention.
it is much more than that. it is the specific provisions.
and i'll take you to them very briefly, my
lords have read it, i'll just refer to them.
it is the specific provisions of the constitution
of jammu and kashmir, sections 4 and 5.
it is the specific provisions of territorial integrity of the state of jammu and kashmir
that our founders promised and the jammu and kashmir constitution recognized in its constitutional text.
such territorial integrity was not promised to any other state.
this is all part of the founding constitutional intention.
now in the 1960s, on an aside, my lord, when thurgood marshall was
asked, why is it so important to have brown versus board desegregate america?
he responded saying that, it is not about their humanity.
it is about our humanity.
so today i present to my lords a different version of that.
it is not simply about that constituent assembly.
it is about the promises of our constitution assembly.
it is about that legacy of interpretation that my lords started four decades ago.
that is what this founding moment is about.
that is what this model of federalism is about.
that is what the intricacies of this model of federalism
that embraced this version of what ms. ramakrishnan called shared sovereign.
that is part of india's federalist structure.
now, please see my lords, may i take my lords,
to section 4 of the constitution of jammu and kashmir, 1957.
and the second proposition is this and it's in the note.
the abrogation of article 370 has vitiated the unique internal sovereignty
guaranteed by both constituent assemblies of jammu and kashmir and india.
and this is in the middle of the note, my lords.
so, part 2 of the constitution of jammu and kashmir categorically retains
internal sovereignty with the state, along with residuary powers to the state government.
this is unique to jammu and kashmir, and distinct from the rest of
india, where residuary powers under article 248, is vested with the union parliament.
and to this, my lords, my lords have
sections 4 & 5, but 4 simply says this.
'it provides that the territory as under 15th august 1947, under the sovereignty
of the ruler, that territory is comprised of the territorial integrity of the state.
and that territorial integrity of the state is guaranteed to be protected.
' and section 5 simply says this.
'it provides that the legislative assembly of the state and all executive and legislative
powers so the legislative assembly of the state is vested with the residuary powers'.
now this brand of the vesting of the residuary powers, the
legislative residuary powers with the state assembly is unique to this state.
so whether we want to display that in a conventional setting, a
conventional telling that only external sovereignty has been surrendered by the state,
in terms of article 371, and that's a sub proposition, an internal
sovereignty is retained by the state, or whether we want to say
that this is shared sovereignty, between the state
and the union, between the two constituent assemblies.
either which way, and my lords have heard arguments speaking to both those ideas.
but either which way, this brand of sovereignty is unique to the state
of jammu and kashmir, and it is especially important in appreciating the unique
federalism that is ascribed to the state, in the federalism that speaks to india.
my lords, on this note, i won't take you to the speeches.
but on this note, we've just made two, three references my lords, 'speech
of kotwal chuni lal' during the constituent assembly debates of jammu and kashmir,
and your lordship will just mark that and that is in the volume compilations.
i'll just read a line from that.
and he makes only two points.
that the territories, as on 15th august 1947, which were under the sovereignty
of the ruler of the state, that is what the state will comprise.
and within that, the state will have a legislative assembly and a legislative council.
so, dual houses and territory ascribed and guaranteed and promised.
this is part of the founding.
and all of that is marked my lords,
so i won't trouble my lords with that.
now, the fourth proposition my lords.
the abrogation of article 370 and the subsequent jammu and kashmir's reorganization
act, 2019, by abolishing, the bicameral legislature of the state has further
violated the unique legislative autonomy secured by the state of jammu and kashmir.
and this is just on top of page 2 my lords.
now for this, my lords, i'll just take your lordships
to sections 46-47 and 50 of constitution of the state
of jammu and kashmir and my lords, that's in volume 2.
we have it here, actually, in your note itself.
it's the article, section 46. it's in volume 2, my lords, of the documents.
46, is at page 5.
section 46, my lords pertains to the legislature for the states, there shall be legislatures
for the state, the bicameral legislature, both the legislative assembly as well as the council.
yes, bicameral. it is extracted in your note as the chief justice said.
yes my lords.
but, my lord, what is important and interesting about this
legislative model, is that section 47 and section 50 provide
for the composition of the legislative assemblies, the assembly and the council.
now the reason why i'm belabouring this, is because the composition speaks to a unique.
my lord justice surya kant has that?
yes.
the composition speaks to a unique regional model of governance and that unique
regional model of governance, was only ascribed to the state of jammu and kashmir.
so 46, 47, and 50.
47 provides for the composition of the legislative assembly
and 50 provides for the composition of the legislative council.
para 7 says? yes, my lord. yes, my lords.
now section 50, of the constitution of jammu and kashmir has unique requirements
of this composition, and this shows a thoughtful regional understanding of the state.
the legislative council is intended not only to have members from districts,
but municipal councils, town area committees, panchayat, so on and so forth.
now this is a very different understanding, from article 171 of the
constitution of india, which provides for legislative councils of a different kind.
may i just read my lords, article 171?
article 171 speaks to the composition of legislative council.
total number of members, my lords of each council shall not exceed.
now subclause 3 and 4. these are only specialist qualifications.
the idea of 171 is not to provide for representation by
region but only to have specialists of memberships, members from specialist institutions.
. governance now in the constitution has come in a different fashion.
it was not prevalent there, so possibly the thought process at that time
while creating the bicameral houses was, to provide such representations from the government.
but the indian constitution has also changed over by inclusion of that?
my lords, the reason why i'm showing these distinctions and my lord, is very correct.
but, the reason why i'm showing this is, that
there was a method, an intention on how to keep.
one, how to recognize the state, two, how
to bring the diversity within the state together.
that is a representative character from a base level.
yes and diversity of regional representation, the only
legislative council which had reservations on religious grounds.
sikhs had seats, very unique.
so there was an understanding of the people who knew the area best, that
there would be a certain regional representation to hold together jammu, kashmir and ladakh.
there is no other legislative council which is thinking through
regions, which is thinking through minority representations in this form.
so when you take that area and divide it up and chop
it up into two union territories, you take away all representation from ladakh.
we got the point. thank you. anything else, dr. guruswamy?
yes my lords. just two brief points.
so, my lord's, following the abrogation of 370 then, and subsequent state reorganization,
a legislative assembly, a 111 members, and the legislative council 36 members were dissolved.
and then you had the state conversion into two union territories.
now, of course, article 169 of the constitution of india
provides for a mechanism of the abolition of legislative councils.
i'm saying this, my lords because it is not as if only
370 has been miraculously removed and ejected, in ways violative of constitutional intent.
it is that everything that has happened has been contra the constitution of india
including, for instance, the dissolution of the legislative council, which was envisaged by a framer.
the legislative councils are meant to be dissolved in
a certain manner, but certainly not in this fashion.
and that constitutional intention of a recognition of identity, of a recognition of
representative democracy, of a recognition of unique federalism extends to all of this.
so you are not just running roughshod over 370.
you are running roughshod over the small, how you dissolve a legislative council
and the big, how you don't hold elections for the last four years?
what is the next point? the second point?
yes, my lords.
now, my lords, a small point is that prior to
the impugned actions, ladakh had 4 mlas and 2 mlcs.
it also. just one minute. you said ladakh had 4 mlas.
ladakh had 4 mlas my lords. and?
and 2 mlcs.
4 mlas after the delimitation in 1995, and 2 mlcs pursuant
to section 50, my lords, of the constitution of jammu and kashmir.
also, my lords it uses. .representation goes away.the legislature itself ceases to exist.
yes my lords.
and my lords also, the ladakh autonomous hills development council act, 1995, provided
for this hills development council, which provided for decentralized, autonomous bodies for governance.
and that has been rendered null and void.
yes, my lords.null and void. all right.
thank you. this is also one of just two other short points.
and i'll make it very brief.
one my lord so i should tell my lords, i
appear in two matters, so that my lords has that.
writ petition my lords 1048 of 2019.
writ petition 1048 of 2019. you already told me you are here as an intervener.
i appear in two matters. this is writ petition 1048 of 2019.
and? and intervention number 138432 of 2023.
138? 138432 my lords, 2023. that's the awami national conference.
maybe the nodal counsel will have to just upload or update our sheet, because.
yes, my lords.
just, maybe you can update the sheet, anyway, anytime today, in
the afternoon or evening, just give it to the court master.
writ petition is shakir shabbir and the ia is the awami national conference.
now the reason why i'm mentioning this also my lords
and i'm cognizant my lords, of the large clock at
the back, my lords we're tuned to your lordships looking to it.
but my lords it's this, that in the writ petition, 1048 of 2019,
there is also a separate intervention, and that ia, actually speaks to delimitation.
yesterday only we said that that stands concluded by the judgment of my lord justice.
my lord. yes.
now, my lord, respectfully, respectfully, the judgment of your lordships, justice oka categorically states,
that the abrogation, the state reorganization act, is not being challenged in this judgment.
my lord justice kaul knows that. my lord justice kaul knows that.
therefore, my lords and justice oka, in that case also specifically says, that counsel
should have raised it initially, or it should have been pled in the petition.
he says that, in his judgment.
and because it is not pleaded, we are not assessing delimitation in context of that.
that is abrogation and reorganization.
we assess delimitation, but we did not go into any other issue.
may i just show you those.
how does a. unless there is a reference made or something.
how does that issue crop up here?
my lord, because, your lordships are seized of everything
that falls out of abrogation and reorganization, including delimitation.
but, that part. now that part is concluded by the judgment.
i mean, there's no reference to this bench on that issue.
but my lordship, at that time, justices kaul and.
somebody should have come there then.
we have heard other people there, whoever wanted to on delimitation.
if this person was so keen and that also
either interven.he has moved an application of intervention in 1.
there is 1028 of 2019. he's not a petitioner, according to you is suing.
no my lords, the same petitioner. this writ petitioner.
he filed a separate application? yes. in his own app.
in his own writ petition has filed an additional application vis-a-vis delimitation.
because it occurs subsequently.
this can't be in the form of an application in a petition.
see in a matter this becomes too complex to get into.
you need to confine to what is there before us.
i follow and bow down.
but i will only say this, my lords, and your lordships may just.
i will only say this that at present, not only have these
two the state been turned into two union territories the delimitation exercise
which breaks down individual constituencies, which goes against that regional autonomous model
of federalism promised in the constitution of jammu and kashmir is now rendered not.
that point you have made.
and therefore, i went through all those points
to show that this is a unique model.
that's fine. now that point you have made no?
yes.
now, if you've chopped up those constituencies and that is
what has happened, my lord, is the chopping up of constituencies.
that will happen. in delimitation exercise always emphasizes inherently a change of constituencies.
otherwise why have a delimitation?
but my lords a respectful submission is that, the
delimitation exercise must either conform to the constitution's requirements.
that we've adjudicated. yeah.
or and given that your lordships are seized of abrogation and the reorganization act.
that's fine.
that point you have made, that you know
this eats into the regional model of federalism.
that point we have taken. thank you dr guruswamy.
my lords, and then i'll just end with this my lords.
manish tewari we will call upon.
my lords, i will just end with this one point.
almost 30 minutes now. 30 minutes, my lords, it can't be.
it felt like two minutes. the best two minutes.
watch is before us? all right. last further point, yes.
i'll just end with this that part of this is that, we made promises.
we the people through our drafters made promises.
it is surely an axiom of decency, constitutional integrity to keep our promises.
thank you, dr. guruswamy. now, mr. manish.
tewari. yes, mr. tewari.
may it please, your lordships, our intervention application number is
160049 of 2019 in writ petition number 1013 of 2019.
in the paper books volume, the intervention application
is at pdf page number 409 to 420.
and our written submissions are in the written submissions
synopsis volume at pdf page number 610 to 644.
volume? this is the pdf volume on submission, synopsis and formulation, your lordships.
you represent who mr. tewari?
i represent padi richo, a former minister in the arunachal government.
and may i commence by answering what the lord chief justice had referred to
yesterday when we were going through the scheduling that the six sub-parts of article
371 are not before your lordships in this matter and that is absolutely correct.
however the underlying principle of autonomy in article 370 and 371, is
more or less the same and so therefore what your lordships will
hold in this matter either way, will have implications on article 371.
and that is what i am here to respectfully point out.
your lordships, the constitution of india, in addition to being
a politico-legal compact also served as a national security instrumentality
in terms of unifying the periphery of india to the hinterland.
because national security is not merely the use of the hard power of the state.
your lordships, when the british were ruling india, they
actually managed the periphery through a process of treaties.
and since there is a paucity of time, i will not lead your
lordships through the various treaties in the north-west, in the north- east of india.
but independent india decided to manage its periphery, its realm through constitutional guarantees.
and the reason is because they were managing
an empire and we were building a republic.
and that's how article 370, which applies to jammu and kashmir, which
is a periphery state, article 371, the six subparts which apply to
the north east and the sixth schedule of the constitution, which applies
to assam, tripura and meghalaya becomes relevant and germane in this matter.
and may i very respectfully point out, your lordships, that even a slight apprehension
in the periphery of india, can have serious implications and your lordships are currently
dealing with one such situation in manipur, and i will not belabour that point further.
before i come to the north east, your lordship, i just wanted to point.
i am sorry for interruption, kindly give me a minute indulgence and i
have instructions to say this, but we have to be very, very responsible
in assisting your lordships and we must understand the difference between temporary provision,
which is article 370, and special provisions with regards to other states, including north-east.
the central government has no intention to touch any
part, which gives special provisions to north-east and other regions.
this submission would have a very potential mischief, and
therefore my lord i am interrupting and making it clear.
let us confine to a temporary provision for jammu and kashmir.
rest are special provisions, not temporary provisions.
so there is no apprehension and let us not try to create that apprehension.
i am putting that apprehension at rest, on behalf of the central government.
your lordship, may i very respectfully point out
i was not referring to the current central government.
i was referring to the principal at stake.
why should we deal with anything in anticipation or in apprehension?
we are dealing with a specific provision, namely, article 370, which was
applicable or it is applicable according to you, to the jammu and kashmir.
we don't have to really expand this ambit on what the
impact of our interpretation would have on other provisions of the constitution.
your lordships, may i respectfully point out.
mr. tewari, also another thing in what he says.
this is a special provision . 370 is stated to be a temporary provision.
of course, the counsels have argued, it is not
temporary that, it was temporary in the context of assembly.
all those aspects are there interpretation of 370.
touching 371 is something which we should take into in these proceedings.
and particularly once, as a constitutional principle, a solicitor general is informing us that
the government has no such intent, why should we apprehend that you know, this
is what the government is about to do in other parts of the country.
your lordships may i. that's not before us and i
don't think we should really enter into that terrain at all.
your lordship, may i respectfully point out, you're absolutely correct with regard to the.
draw the impact of, say, the abrogation of a state into a union territory.
what could be the fall out in other parts of the country?
certainly that point has been made, that's present to our mind.
but let's not now place specific focus on north-east
that you will probably do this in the north-east.
i think the apprehension is allayed by the statement
which has been made on behalf of the government.
and beyond what was argued by the petitioners, namely, that if
you permit and that is independent of jammu and kashmir, if
you permit the abrogation of a state and its constitution into
a union territory, why would it be confined only to jammu and kashmir?
that point has been made. we have made a note of that.
we will be hearing on the response to them.
my. mr. tewari, just one thing.
i think as far as the other parts of north-east is concerned because
your written submissions specifically talked about it, that in view of the statement
made, i don't think we are required to go into all that, one.
number two, as far as article 3 & 4, whatever is there, if you
have any submissions to make, just confine to those articles dehors north-east, that's possible.
but otherwise we are dealing with only 370 and article 3 & 4.
your lordships, i am extremely cognizant of what has fallen from your lordships and
i will try and confine my arguments to the constitutional interpretation, primarily because you
were absolutely correct that while article 370 has a sub-heading as a temporary or
transitional provision, 371 and the rest of the
provisions also have a subheading as a special provision.
so therefore, i am not trying to equate temporary, which has
been argued as permanent with special provisions, but the underlying principle
of autonomy, which runs through 370 and 371 is the same.
and that's the limited argument that i want to make.
so, your lordships, before i go on to the arguments with regard
to the article 3 & 4 may i very respectfully point out that.
mr. tewari, there are even certain special provisions with respect to state of maharashtra also.
state of maharashtra and gujarat. what we are interpreting is only 370.
your lordship is absolutely correct. that's why.
, see the interventionist bases his intervention only on one principle, that is 371(a).
once we are not touching that, what does the interventionist have to say in this?
and mr. tewari, ultimately, you have nothing to say on article 370.
so then why should we hear.
your lordships, may i have a submission with regard to 370,
and then i will try and make a submission as .
you have not formulated anything in your submissions on 370.
your lordships, there is a submission on 370 in our written submissions.
let us see that and then we can close on that.
619 to 623 of our written submissions your lordship.
with respect to different areas, are different.
there's no 370(1)(a). your lordship, may i be.
your lordship, may i make a submission with regard to 370.
and then i'll go on to article 3 & 4 which we have formulated.
mr. tewari, what we'll do is, we'll close your ia,
by taking the statement of the solicitor general on the record.
and we'll just close the ia right now, so that there's no
ambiguity left in on the adjudication, on the ia, or in the
position of the union government on any of the states in the north- east.
well your lordships, if your lordships on the statement, which has been given by
the union, would like to close the ia, i have absolutely no objection to it.
but may i just make one submission with regard to 370 with your indulgence?
mr. tewari, that's not what the applicant has come for.
applicant has come with some other basis.
whatever apprehensions may be in the mind, which was
not subject matter here, is also allayed by the statement.
why should we, in these 370 proceedings, you yourself say is a very sensitive area.
why should we take.
we'll just say that the applicant, urging its submissions through.urging their submissions
through mr. manish tewari, learned counsel, has urged that apart from the
provisions which are contained in part 21 of the constitution, pertaining to
the state of jammu and kashmir, pertaining to jammu and kashmir, there
are special provisions in the constitution governing the north-east in the same part.
so since it has been submitted that the interpretation which would be placed
by this court on article 370 is possibly impact upon the other provisions.
the solicitor general has submitted on the instructions, specific instructions of the union
government that the union government has absolutely no intent to touch or affect.
to affect any of the special provisions applicable to
the north-east and to any other part of india.
then next, the reference to the constitution bench is
confined to the provisions of article 370 of the constitution.
there is no commonality of interest between the issues which have sought
to be, which are sought to be addressed by the intervener and
the issues which have been raised in the reference to this constitution bench.
in any event, the statement which has been made on behalf
of the union government would allay any apprehension in that regard.
we therefore close the ia which will stand disposed of.
obliged my lord.
that's an addition to the well settled principle that
in constitutional adjudication, court will not directly arise for adjudication.
they will not stray to all those areas where court need not go into.
ms. warisha farasat. i'm very cognizant of the time.
and i'll be very brief. my lords have heard very lengthy arguments.
so i want to start by a quote
by the soviet premier at the time, nikita kurshev.
and what he said was very interesting.
he said, ' you indians are a remarkable people. how did you manage to
liquidate the princely states without liquidating the princes.' so, my lord, i want to
start by saying that in fact, it was the constitution writing was a remarkable exercise.
and the coming together of the indian union
and the indian federation was a remarkable exercise.
and it's in that context and even the soviet
premiere of the time because it was not common practice.
these nations were being born. and so my lords, i want to start.
i started with that to come to my first point.
i have three quick points and i'll try and make them very quickly.
the first is about the concept of federalism
as it operates in the context of india.
and to that extent, my lords, i want to say
that, yes, at one level, jammu and kashmir is unique.
but at the other level it is also
part of a federal union as federations are understood.
and i want to take the example of the united states,
because it's the first democratic country, federal country that comes to mind.
and my lords, in fact, the us national constitution is a very thin text.
my lord knows that.
it only has 7 articles, supplemented by a total of 27 amendments.
and it is importantly, article 1, section 8 of the us constitution that
enumerates the specific powers taken over by the congress and the federal level
of the government, leaving all other spheres of autonomy to the states by default.
this is the 10th amendment which expressly defines this data.
so my lords, my point is that federations, as
we understand can have a variety of permutations and combinations.
there is no one kind of a typical
state, even within federations, that can be envisaged.
my lords, my point then comes to jammu and kashmir
and how do we envisage states within the indian federal union.
my lords, there are various ways. one is we have a union territory.
so, in a way, it's state minus, minus.
then we have something, my lord.
have dealt with it extensively in the gnctd case that
it is a ut, but with legislative powers, my lords.
and so you have.
and then you have something like a jammu and kashmir my lords,
which is a state plus, plus, with its own constitution and with its.
so, a constituent assembly was formed and a constitution was given.
so we must see that there are various permutations and combinations
and it is unique, but also a normal part of federalism.
and my lords, there is a very important concept within federalism.
one is 'holding together' and the other my lords, is 'coming together.'
so while i would, and my main proposition is that while most
of the indian union represents what has been called a 'holding together'
type of federation, where a multicultural polity with strong unitary features, constitutionally
splits autonomy between the union and its region to hold those regions together.
however, jammu and kashmir represents much more a 'coming together' federation,
my lords, where previously sovereign polities pooled their sovereignties and resources
to come together and form a more secure and long standing union.
so it is within that that we're envisaging the federalism, that is envisaged for j&k.
my lords, i have said various things in my note.
it supplements it, but i'll quickly then come to my second point and
my second point is about the fact that when we look at article 368.
i'm saying, let's forget article 370 for a little while.
and the amending constitutional, amending provision that 373 provides.
let's just look at article 368, which is the constitutional amending power.
now, by their very nature a constitutional amending power is far
stricter than the normal legislative powers that even the parliament has.
my lords, so therefore, there are many checks and balances that
article 368 envisages, that is not envisaged in the general legislative
powers that are exercised either by state legislatures or by the parliament.
so, my lords, therefore, when we are reading 370, so what is my point?
my point is that therefore, when we are reading 370, it must
be a very strict interpretation of what can or cannot be done.
and therefore when we are reading 370, it cannot be that
in a casual manner, we are substituting one authority with another,
as has happened in the constitutional orders that have been promulgated.
my lords, i then come to in fact, my lord chief justice's question, while i'm
answering this and my lords have read this article, i don't know how many times.
370 but may i please urge you to read it once more with
me. please, please my lord, if you can come to article 370 once more.
because my lords have asked a very important question from all
of us on this side, and that is that, how do
we read 2 and 3, and the constituent assembly part in it?
and there's a clear answer for that.
my lord if we read this. sorry, my lords i apologize.
yes.
if my lords can read para 2 with me once more, there's a clear answer.
'if the concurrence of the government of the state referred to in paragraph
2 of sub-clause b of clause 1 or in second proviso to sub-clause
d of that clause be given before the constituent assembly, for the purpose
of framing the constitution of the state is conveyed. it shall be placed
before such assembly for such decision as it may be taken thereon.' my
lords, i'm making a simple point that this was a transitional provision because
of the fact that it uses the word 'before such assembly.' it only
provided a protection to place before the constituent
assembly, when a constituent assembly had not been formed.
after that, the power that is vested in 2 was subsumed by 1.
and therefore it answers, my lord's questions that are the subsequent presidential orders legal?
yes, they are.
because they are not under exercise of power under 2, but under 1.
and my concomitant point with that is very respectfully, so our constituent assembly makers,
or they were our constitution makers were aware that at some point in time,
the constituent assembly of j&k would have served
its purpose and would no longer be there.
and for that particular purpose, they had given that how
can you make changes and that was provided under 1.
right, my lord?
so therefore, they were equally aware that the
constituent assembly would cease to be in power.
just one.
my lords, i'm sorry if i'm moving very
quickly, but i'm just cognizant of the time.
my lords, so, my essential point here is, that the constitution makers were aware of
the fact that the constituent assembly would finish its function and then no longer exist.
and therefore for making any changes they had provided for the via media
via 1, but for the abrogation they only left it to the consequent assembly.
my lords, there is no other way to reconcile the two.
my lords otherwise, how do we say that the presidential orders.
and that's a question that has been falling from
my lordships, i have seen very much from day one.
and the only way to look at it is, that
clause 2 was a transitional provision, was only provided for.
and my lords, there is logic in it.
because of the fact that before the constituent assembly was formed, the government
would have needed concurrence, because it was transitional, we did not know how
exactly they represented, whether they represented the will of the people, etc., or not.
and then after that, there was an assumption that the government
of the day would be representing the will of the people.
and so at least with respect to certain decisions, at least with
respect to making certain other parts of the constitution applicable to the state.
however, equally my lords, if we take that interpretation, then we have to set in
time, the constituent assembly and its power and the recommendation being necessary for the abrogation.
my lords, because then it will reconcile and my lords, not
just one, very quick last point, is the question, my lords,
that even if we left everything aside, my lords, what happened
on the 5th and 6 august 2009, and my lords, are a constitutional court.
my lord's, three former chief ministers were in detention.
and these are all facts, my lords.
three former chief ministers, most of your legislative assembly, my lord's,
the will of the people, is exercised by the legislative assembly
were in some form of detention or the other either under
the public safety act, or my lords, under you know, 107-105, it's laughable.
in delhi if you know entire polity and all of the politicians who
have actually supported you have been legislative members, are put in this manner.
and therefore i come to my last, but very
important argument, that this is malice-in-law, because what this demonstrates.
and how do we determine malice-in-law? by the actions surrounding the abrogation itself.
and my lords i'll just read very quickly, because i don't
want to burden my lords with reading anything at this stage.
but malice-in-law is a very well settled principle.
i'll just read it.
and it has been held by this honourable court as follows: this court has
consistently held that the state is under an obligation to act fairly without ill
will or malice, in fact or in-law, where malice is attributed to the state.
and my lords, we are doing that.
it can never be a case of personal ill
will or spite on the part of the state.
legal malice or malice-in-law, means something done without lawful excuse.
it is a deliberate act in disregard to the.
read your submission below the quotation, the abrogation of article 370 was effected.
yes, yes. you can read those two sentences.
yes, my lords. the abrogation of article 370 was effected, secretly, unilaterally and coercively.
not only was the democratic process disregarded, but also the people and their
leaders were kept in the dark, prevented from communicating with others, my lords,
and even detained till the union of india could issue them a fait accompli.
in times when pre-legislative public consultations, my lords, and post-legislative social audits.
my lords, we know that.
even before, you know, there's talk of whatever law, there are public consultations and deliberations.
but here, my lords, what has happened is that the will of the people has
been trampled upon and there can be no other reading in this regards, my lord.
thank you so much, ms. farasat. whom do you represent?
my lords, i'm in ia 159655. mr. venkatesh nayak.
just want to know who is he?
my lord, he is the rti activist.
he's a very well-known and respected rti activist.
i'm so grateful. may i lordship? yes.
my lordship, i'm a little bit nervous because due to the time
constraint, i will try to avoid repetition and try to assist my lordships.
lordships it's imperative sine qua non to slightly touch the provisions of 370
concurrence 356 and article 3, and federalism and democracy very briefly, my lordships.
and the circumstances under which. can we just run through your notes?
very briefly, within one minute.
let's look at your nates so that it'll
just bring clarity on what you want to argue.
yes your lordships. your lordships, and the circumstances under which three.
instrument of accession was signed.
and the latter to the maharaja by the lord mountbatten, wherein
he says that no sooner the normalcy returns, the will of
the people will be ascertained, and i believe, lordships, the will
of the people was expressed by the constituent assembly, by j&k constituent assembly.
and they framed the constitution and defined the constitutional relationship between union of india
and state of j&k my lordships, the constituent assembly of j&k provides in article 370.
my lordships in 370, is a self-contained provision which prescribes very candid clearly
that consultation with regard to the instrument of accession, the subjects mentioned and
by that reference, my lordships the instrument of accession is part of the 370.
because, whenever we take recourse to the subjects, we
have to take recourse to the instrument of accession.
my lordships, i have in my.
submitted the document which i obtained under rti with regard
to supplementary instrument of accession signed by the other states.
j&k is the only state which didn't sign this supplementary accession.
only state. your lordship 370, is the constitutional recognition to the instrument of accession.
my lordship but the manner in which the concurrence, which is
very candid clear, my lordship, express provision of the law that
concurrence means on the aid and advice of the consuls of the ministers.
my lordship, the j&k constituent assembly in 1957 conveyed
that the 370 will remain in the same form.
they didn't recommend its abrogation.
in fact, my lordships they recommended that it will continue as they pass the resolution.
and my lordships, the constituent assembly of the j&k temporary provision was only because it
was left to the discretion of the j&k constituent assembly to take the final decision.
now lordships, the concurrence by the governor is not permissible under law.
because my lordships concurrence affects the autonomy of the state.
it's because of that reason, the concurrence is
to be given by the duly elected government.
it cannot be the governor under articles 93 or 356 of the constitution.
my lordships the article 3 of the constitution says, view of the state.
what happened in jharkhand? two years, three years debate.
telangana when was formed.
and with regard to j&k, 356 invoked, the
relevant provision suspended, which is unknown to law.
and with regard to j&k, there was consent, my lordship, i was a full-fledged
state, i was having my own constitution 1939, prior to the indian independence act.
and it's because of that reason, the other side of the kashmir, which
is with our neighbouring country, they have right now, maybe on the papers,
they have the prime minister, they have the president, they have the legislature.
i'm functional democracy. i'm proud of it.
i'm a nationalist.
but lordship, i take liberty to share with my lordships, i am
being, people make mockery of me. is this democracy you are proud of?
they have the full fledged state, i was having within
the constitution, my prime minister, my sadr-e riyasat, my legislature.
i am reduced it to the ut, lg.
forget my lordship, about the prime minister.
65th amid, in 65 sixth amendment in j&k constitution, sheikh abdullah was in jail.
the amendment was made, and this nomenclature was changed.
lordship, i'm concluding very important, lordship with regard to the will of the people lordship.
the will of the people is of paramount importance, federalism, rule of law,
democracy, lordship is the soul of constitution basic structure, held by kesavananda bharati case.
lordship, it's not mere elections democracy. it's beyond, it's vast, it's the functional democracy.
my lordship, will of the people is of paramount importance.
i'm alive of the fact lordships. thank you mr. lone.
courts are not to get swayed away.
i'm, one minute only lordship. courts are not to get swayed away by the emotions.
but lordships, here in this instant case, the will of the people.
that is the constituent assembly of the j&k.
the sentiments, aspirations, the desire of the people
is intrinsic to the will of the people.
that is to be looked by lordships right now.
lordships, i am concluding but this is very important, lordship.
that is the report of state autonomy, which is the will of the people.
this autonomy report is by, its 8290, volume 14, document compilation.
the government has set up your lordship, it's very important.
what is the page? pdf? page 8290, lordship.
can somebody give us the. volume 14 lordship.
one second, he will give us. all right.
what is the point in there?
point is, my lordship, the state government set up a committee to examine the question
of restoration of autonomy, the state of jammu and kashmir by government order number 19(6).
dr. karan singh is the head of the chairman of this committee.
there are other members. lordship very, within one minute or so, i will conclude.
this is the aim and object of this committee.
however other states exercise the choice. yes.
pdf 549. 549. yes.
how other indian states exercise their choice, how they participated in constitution
framing, and in what form did they adopt it, in not our concern.
this shall be referred to whatever necessary in pages to follow.
but it's relevant to mention here that whereas other princely states signed
the instrument of accession to india, and subsequently the instrument of merger.
the accession of j&k state was limited only
to the areas of defence, external affairs, and communication.
uniquely, j&k state is the only one to have negotiated the
terms of membership of the union right till the delhi agreement.
it did not accept any provision of the constitution of india, other
than those agreed to the instrument of accession and retained its autonomy.
autonomy has remained since the days of accession.
the heartbeat of the people of the state.
state has lost all resilience to autonomy.
its erosion is the primary cause of kashmir dissent.
keeping this in view, shri narasimha rao, the then prime minister
of india, announced in 1995 that the union government would be
prepared to consider autonomy, short of independence for jammu and kashmir.
mr. devegowda, as prime minister of jammu and kashmir maximum autonomy, the
assurance was incorporated in this common minimum program of the national front government.
this is very pertinent my lordship. this is the autonomy resolution, recommendations are there.
this is by the state legislature. this is the will of the people.
lordships, justice saghir, a working group was constituted.
one of important was headed by justice saghir and the recommendation of
that very committee was that, the autonomy be restored to state of j&k.
my lordship, j&k was having its own constitution.
this is embodiment of my emotions, desire and aspiration, the j&k constitution.
my lordship this provides the flag under section 144, which
is which is made dysfunctional by the 273 c.o. impugned c.os.
my lordship, very briefly, lordship, with regard to
the which is very vital, and very important.
now we will conclude. the others have to.
only one minute, my lordship. that is the delhi agreement.
that was about three minutes ago. so i think we'll conclude.
one minute lordship, only one minute. thank you very much.
mr. bhat now. mr. zahoor ahmed bhat.
i pray lordship, keeping in with the democracy,
federalism and the self contained provision of 370.
we pray that it's not sustainable.
the impugned c.os, so justice be done with the people of jammu and kashmir, lordships.
thank you. thank you. obliged my lords.
your lordships, i teach indian politics, to the students in jammu and kashmir,
and it is very embarrassing and very difficult for me. like people like
me since 2019, when we teach this beautiful constitution and beautiful democracy and
then they will ask it, are we really a democracy since post 19th
august 2009, since august '19, that is very difficult for us to answer.
basically, it was very unbelievable on 4th august 2019, when despite the assurance
of honourable governor, then governor, that the article 370 will not be abrogated,
in the midnight, curfew is being imposed, all three chief ministers, cabinet ministers.
just formulate your point, just formulate the point now, because
we've heard all this almost several.also, i'll tell you why.
there are other people.
mr. sankaranarayanan, has been waiting here for the last twelve
days appearing.or how many days.eleven.we have to give him some time.
so please give us your specific points, so
we can leave some 20 minutes at the end.
mr. baig has to argue for ten minutes.
within two days within two days, 5th and 6th august, special
status of jammu and kashmir was downgraded into two union territories,
union territory of ladakh and union territory of jammu and kashmir.
these impugned actions are completely, completely in violation to constitution, morality of
constitution of india, a right to democracy and consent of the people
of jammu and kashmir and ladakh, procedure established under the law, national
interest of this country, co-operative federalism, supremacy of constitution, rule of law.
on 5th august and 6th august, jammu and kashmir had the legislature, which had
basically the legislature of jammu and kashmir, comprising the legislative assembly and the legislative council.
that point was made just this morning by dr. guruswamy.
she's made the point. this is what i am going to tell.
yes. don't repeat that because that has already been made this morning.
just you were listening to it. same points has been made.
get on with something new. tell us something new.
and ms. ramakrishnan also has made the same point in the morning.
i'm submitting, legislative council is having 36 members and
it was not dissolved on 5th and 6th august.
it was dissolved in october 2019, so it was in operation.
legislative assembly was dissolved in may 2018 because they are.
state legislature is comprised of legislative council and legislative assembly.
on 5th and 6th august, it was there.
so, if we respect the consent of the people, which is federal, which is
basic structure of the constitution, so there could have been option to get any
concurrence from, even if recommendation for this reorganization act, some state legislature which is mandatory.
so part of the state legislature was that.
so, when we see this, this was ignored.
this was ignored and this was not highlighted as on date.
the legislative council 36 members, they were also detained and some
of them were detained and some of them was not detained.
this was already told us by so many people
that all three cms, legislature, they were all detained.
few were detained and few not detained, because we don't have
absolute this information, it was, whole the state was under the blockade.
now lordships, when we go to jammu and
kashmir state reorganisation act, why proviso third is suspended.
so it was that so basically there is.
alright. thank you mister. very important submission.
proclamation dated december 2018. clear president.
president is knowing that, this is the intentions because legislative.then we
get this reorganization act in the parliament where it mandates state legislature.
we are clear. clear before one year in proclamation proviso third has been suspended.
coming to the article 371, important point which i want to highlight here.
one is consent of the people was not respected which
is the very beautiful and basic structure in our constitution.
article 370 basically, it was as guruswamy this ma'am said, that it was a
constitutional intention of constituent assembly of india and constituent assembly of jammu and kashmir.
they issued them some warranty and constituent assembly of jammu and kashmir made the constitution.
when jammu and kashmir constitution was framed, then in my
opinion, the proviso sub-clause 3 of article 370 has gone.
that is no scope. so. we'll wrap it up now.
thank you very much. yes. now mr. baig?
this is one submission at last. just one submission at last.
we hope that this impugned actions, impugned orders may be quashed and pushed .
yes mr. baig.
my lords, i must express my gratitude for you to give me some time.
there was some misunderstanding.
i had an advocate on record about a month
back and he didn't inform me that he had withdrawn.
so i had to make very urgent arrangements.
and the kind of assistance which this honourable court deserves, in
one day i could not really come up to that standard.
my lord, before i go to the present petition i
must inform my lord that this issue had come in 1982.
there was a conflict between two parties in the legislative assembly on
whether article 370 should be made permanent or is totally transitory temporary?
because the sideline says temporary and special provisions.
370 has 3 temporary transitory positions.
my lord, there is a history behind that why it was called 370 temporary.
because either they were bound by our misfortune.
our prime minister had gone to united nations with
this issue about kashmir and they had passed a resolution.
and they had said, you should have a plebiscite.
that resolution is still there.
thanks lord, nobody's job after that united states resolution
is for that reason that it had been called temporary.
that's the only reason.
now, my lord i am seeking your lordship's permission first of
all, to refer to a scholar a.g. noorani, i know him personally.
he had taken the permission from the prime minister to go into the archives and
take out the documents which were confidential and then he my lord, wrote this book.
it was not out of imagination or out of
some sources, like me and others or some politicians.
it was with the sanction of the government of
india that he had access to these archives my lord.
now first of all, my lord if your lordship have volume 20, books-
f. i'll be reading from that your lordship has that volume, 20 books-f.
what pdf page will that be? it says my lord article.
yes, we've got that. it's at page 1, volume 20.
that's mr. noorani's book.
article 370 of the constitution of india relating to the state of jammu and kashmir.
jammu is missing. is now. that time it was 60 years old.
now it is much longer.
the constitution came into force on 26 january 1950, which
our children celebrate every year this 26th of and 15th
of august, 26th january 1950 and with it this unique provision.
all other provisions were debated in the constituent assembly of india after deliberate
relations in its drafting committee and sometimes discussions in the congress parliamentary party.
article 370 was discussed for five months by the prime minister of india, jawahar
lal nehru, and his colleagues with the prime minister of jammu kashmir, sheikh mohammad
abdullah and his colleagues from may to october 1949, and then the reference is there.
the state of jammu and kashmir is the only state, only state in
the union of india which negotiated the terms of its membership with the union.
the reason for that was mr. jawahar lal nehru's security
council and resolution, which said that status quo should be maintained.
then they decide which party is right.
the constituent assembly merely put the imprimatur approval on 17th october
1949, to a draft agreed between the union and the states.
article 370 records, a solemn, compact.
neither side can amend or abrogate it, unilaterally
except in accordance with the terms of that provision.
the union home minister, your lordship may forget that
and move on to the next my lord, page 2.
'a little over a decade after.' it's the second para, 'a little over a
decade after the enactment of article 370, it's co-architect, prime minister nehru declared in
the lok sabha on 27th november 1963, that
article 370 within quotes has been eroded .
if i may use the word and many things have
been done in the last few years, which have made
the relationship of kashmir with the union of india very close.
there is no doubt that kashmir is fully integrated and
that integration was not only constitutional, it was also emotional.
it was also based on certain principles.
kashmiri's rejected the idea of pakistan.
some fresh steps are being taken and in
the next month or two, they will be completed.
we should allow it to go on.
what had happened in the next couple of months .
we do not want to take the initiative in
this matter and completely put an end to article 370.
that was in mind that in some form or
the other, it should stay there, maybe for emotional reasons.
there was no need for that, as the union home minister
gulzarilal nanda explained in the lok sabha on 4th of december 1964.
the only way of taking the constitution of india into
jammu and kashmir is through the application of article 370.
it is a tunnel.
it is through this tunnel that a good deal of traffic has been passed.
it is a one way tunnel, we are not unhappy with that.
he pointed out that while the normal process of constitutional amendment is subject to
stringent conditions, the process of amendment made available under article 370 is very simple.
it's a pragmatic approach.
why to have a constitutional amendment from time to time, if
you can pass an executive order 370, why not resolve the case?
sorry sir.
in regard to the rest of india, if a state's power are
to be curbed and correspondingly those of the union and law, the
elaborate procedure laid down in article 368 will have to be followed.
in regard to the state of jammu and kashmir, nanda argued, a
mere executive order made by the president under article 370 would suffice.
his successors in office accepted this interpretation of article 370.
except my lord as your lordship will see, that is it a tunnel?
it is a tunnel alright?
it appears that mr. noorani's thesis is substantially in terms of what mr.
dwivedi argued, because mr. noorani also said that once the constituent assembly of
j&k was dissolved, and the constitution was framed, then article 370 came to an end.
and then everything he says that happened thereafter, is unconstitutional.
yes, my lord. nanda concluded what happened is that only the shell is there.
article 370, whether you keep it or not, has been
completely emptied of its contents, nothing has been left in it.
now your lordship may kindly turn to page 3 of para 2.
'the indian independence act empowered the governor general of india to adopt the
government of india act 1935, as the interim constitution till the enactment of
a constitution by the constituent assembly of the state. that act has adapted,
served as a constitution from 15th of august 1947 to 25th of january
1950, my lord.' then my lord, the last five lines of this page,
the governor general had written a letter stipulated that, 'as soon as law
and order have been restored in kashmir and her soil cleared of the
invader.' some years back, those invaders came, my lord, not
as just invaders but as a militants, but as terrorists.
'the government of india made it clear that they would regard
it as a provisional until such time as the will of
the people.' mr. baig, what is the drift of what you are arguing?
i mean, what is your contention? what is your submission?
my submission, my lord, is finally this, that in all these documents
and orders i have studied, the abrogation of the state assembly, the
abrogation of all its institutions, abrogation of article 370 is unconstitutional, unnecessary.
it is just a political game.
that is my lord the pith and substance of my argument.
then my lord, clause 7 of the instrument of accession will
show that in the beginning, our accession was on one extreme
and now it has gone from one extreme to another extreme.
in the beginning, according to the white paper on jammu and kashmir, published
by the government of india early 1956 recorded, 'in accepting the accession, the
government of india made it clear that they would regard it as purely
provisional, until such time as the will of the people of the state
could be assessed.' then my lord, i go to the next page, in second paragraph.
'the state had acceded to india 1947 in respect of only of defence,
foreign affairs and communications, negotiations were held on 15th and 16th of may '49.
as the deputy prime minister, vallabhbhai patel's residence in new
delhi on kashmir's future setup, nehru and abdullah were present.
foremost among the topics were the framing of constitution for the state and the
subjects in respect of which the state should accede to the union of india.
on the first, nehru recorded in a letter to abdullah on
18th may that both patil and he agreed that it was
a. possible to formulate because you formulated it in your submissions.
instead of really reading us through mr. noorani's book, we'll certainly look at
mr. noorani, the book, all the other material which has been given to us.
if you could just formulate now your points, really, because a
lot of this ground has been covered by the counsel preceding you.
yes, my lord. almost everything is. .
written submission but anyway, i think since my lord want to
go to the bottom of it, but in a very short.
before i go to this. my lords, the written submissions.
i have also written submissions.
this issue, arose for the first time, in supreme court of india, in 1982.
in a presidential reference, my lords.
there was a dispute in the legislative assembly of
jammu and kashmir, which was also its constituent assembly.
a dispute arose, whether article 370 should be changed or modified?
that was the issue. my lords, this.
it went to the supreme court.
at that time, my lord i was vice
chairman of a political party and i submitted.
well on written note. it is here.
my lords, i'll pass it on.
in this my lords, your lordships should see that after your lordships heard us,
the simple order was, we don't think it's necessary to intervene in this matter.
and that's how it stood. that's why nobody was bothered about it.
after about every month, every two months, one entry or the
other was, my lord, brought through article 370, into jammu and kashmir.
and when sheikh abdullah objected to it, my lord, he was sent to
prison, for 19 years and his deputy bakshi ghulam mohammad, was taken into confidence.
when he stopped playing the game, he was a removed and mr.
ghulam mohammad sadiq was made the chief minister maybe because of majority.
now my lord, this is a tragic story and finally it
has landed here in this august house for the final saying.
if this article, as some people have said my lord, that this article is useless.
but there is something more than bread and butter for human beings,
whether they are people from jammu and kashmir, jammu or kashmir, or ladakh.
they have my lord.
they were born with the idea, that somehow we will be protected.
we have special rights under 370.
article 3 was amended by the impugned legislation and totally contrary to the
provisions of article 370, ladakh, jammu and kashmir was broken into three parts.
governor was replaced by lieutenant governor general, who is a gentleman of the highest order.
there's no doubt about that. but how can 370 be abrogated?
what was the mechanism?
first dissolve.ask the governor to dissolve the legislative assembly of jammu and kashmir.
for what reason? nobody knows. he just passed the order at around 12:00 at night.
the certain orders were then issued by him.
after some time he was transferred without any reason and sent to a godforsaken place.
and what he said thereafter. i will not bring.
i needn't bring it on record. this is step two.
what is the step three?
you pass an order, by virtue of which
the constitution of jammu and kashmir is abrogated.
and you pass that order under article 370.
after that what is the next step?
you abrogate article 370. now i'll pass on the documents to my lords.
your lordships are all the documents which are .
if i really go into details my lord, i will take quotes.
and then my class fellow mr. kapil sibal had taken.
but since your lordships have set a deadline, i must
accept the guillotine and say that thank you very much.
and kindly let me place on record.
thank you so much. thank you mr. baig.
mr. sankaranarayanan. what we'll.
my lords please permit me. you are now the final counsel on your side.
we'll give you half an hour from 2:00 to 2:30.
my lord, may i have permission to place our record.
why not, mr. sankaranarayanan, just tell the nodal counsel to circulate what mr baig gave.
please circulate the. no difficulty.
we have a nodal counsel who will scan it
and just make sure that it's on our record.
naturally. so mr. sankaranarayanan, we will hear you between 2:00 to 2:30.
but besides, i know you'd be able to
do it in half an hour and then.
my lord, their attendance will be recorded.
certainly. we'll be back at 2:00. thank you mr. baig.
yes.
my lords may i first express my deepest gratitude for the immense
patience that you have shown to all of us on the petitioner's side.
you've not cut us short terribly and you've allowed us all wide leeway and latitudes.
i'm grateful for that. i appear in writ petition 1068.
1068 of 2019 on behalf of soayib qureshi.
soayib qureshi is an advocate. an advocate on record of this court as well.
he's from kashmir.
the large batch of petitions before my lords, which includes people who are not
only from kashmir, who are not only politicians include the former home secretary from kerala.
it includes professors, educationists, etc. the reason why i mentioned this, is this case
the way we see it is not a case only for kashmir or kashmiris.
it actually opens a vista to many multifarious abuses that
the executive can heap on the constitution if the means
that they have adopted were to be utilized in future as well.
there is a principle called obsta principiis, which means that whenever anything
that is approaching or encroaching upon our rights starts, you must nip
it in the bud, that's the reason we are all here because
this is an encroachment on something we cherish the most, which is our constitution.
kashmir is just an example or an avenue for how that is done.
and i will seek to demonstrate how that is.
now, your lordships were right when you said i've been here for twelve days.
but your lordships have also been here for twelve days.
so i've seen all the arguments that has come before mine, which is
why i've managed to cut and crop a lot, which has already been covered.
i will largely be adopting the arguments that have been made
by mr. chandra dev singh and dr. dhavan and ms. nitya ramakrishnan.
i just wanted to tell your lordships before i start that there are
some documents which i won't take your lordships through, but you may note it.
i mentioned this on the last occasion, which will, i think,
benefit the court when eventually you are drawing your conclusions my lords.
mr ramachandran had at length gone through this
matter and he created two list of dates.
a short list of dates which are at page 17 of the
written submissions, volume 1 and a long list of dates where he
extracted from every single document the relevant part and put it together.
that's at page 32 of the long list of dates.
so page 17 is a short list of dates of the written
submissions, volume 1, and page 32 is a long list of dates.
the long list of dates is what mr. sibal took out.
no, it's different. this is different. this is from mr. ramachandran submissions.
right. page 32 of volume 2. written submissions volume 1.
mr. sibal's is written submissions volume 2.
so in written submissions volume 1, you have
page 17, which is short list of dates.
page 32, which is long list of dates.
then my lords, v. p. menon's book on integration of indian
states, mr. prashanto sen referred to yesterday a couple of pages.
i wanted your lordship just to note that there are two chapters.
one is chapter 20, which deals specifically with jammu and kashmir.
a most remarkable man. if you see his writing, despite him being
first person there, you would never find any value judgments being made.
it's only purely descriptive of everything that took place.
so chapter 20, which starts in volume 15 pdf page 1257.
volume 15, pdf page 1257 is chapter 20.
and at pdf page 1304, same volume is chapter 24.
now the second chapter deals with how the actual integration took place, the mergers, accessions,
etc. the third document, which i think would benefit my lords, is the white paper.
and the white paper is the entirety of volume 4.
so documents volume 4 is entirety of white paper.
my associates in fact, have gone through them para nuas and have created a table.
about para 224, there's a chapter on territorial integration.
territorial integration. exactly. now. just give me that reference again.
that's white paper is volume 4, my lords.
the entirety of volume 4. yes. that's 1951.
yes, my lord.
then this is not part of the compilation, but granville
austin's book on the indian constitution, which is the first book.
'working of the democratic constitution', second one.
but the first one, which is definitely there in the libraries.
cornerstone. cornerstone. cornerstone is 243 to 254.
just repeat the pages again. pages 243 to 254 my lords.
of which volume? it's not in the.
you're referring to the book. it's the book separately.
now one separate point just because we are on this history bit.
the chief justice yesterday asked for the background of
the union territories, and we were trying to assist.
in ndmc, the nine judges judgment my lords, which is on record.
it's pdf page 229, volume 14. volume 14, page 229.
from paras 8 to 19, the entire background and sequence of
how we came up with the 7th amendment of the union
territories is there which deals with 1919, the 1935, chief commissioner's provinces, all.
so that i think is helpful paragraphs?
8 to 19. i'm sorry. 8 to 19.
which page? that's page 229 of volume 14.
lastly, again on that point yesterday, my lords, we had
shared the photos of that original constitution with the schedules.
now, if you notice in the schedules, they keep referring to
section 290-a of the government of india act, because all those
are states, which have been added by virtue of section 290-a.
now, strangely, it's not part of the government of
india act, which we have as part of our documents.
but it is part of the white paper.
so in the white paper volume, pdf page 77 is where
your lordships will find section 290-a, which was inserted for that purpose.
because i'm appearing for an advocate, i feel it was my duty.
and this is what the instructions i have from the
aforementioned advocate to ensure that we must be careful when
we assist a constitution bench to ensure that the court avoids pitfalls.
now it would not be fair of us to present the case, which is
not supported by the precedent, or which the precedent has specifically squashed, which has happened.
and i'm afraid i'll have to do that fairly unpleasant task of differing
from some of the counsels who came before me on a couple of points.
i want to clear that up right now.
the first mr. dwivedi, he made arguments, with reference to 370
clause 3 not surviving, and the entirety of 370, therefore not
surviving, that the entirety of it had come to an end.
your lordships had said constitutional practice would trump that.
there was subsequent constitutional practice.
but i'm afraid this was the exact argument that was
taken before this bench, and where your lordships passed the
order in the shah faesal matter when the reference was sought.
now, the reason is sampat prakash, which is a five judges bench, had
that argument taken before it saying that 370 has come to an end.
so, you couldn't pass any orders after 1957 by advertence to 370, clause 1.
sampat prakash squarely rejected it.
and when, in fact, couple of our colleagues had wanted to have that
reference, we also argued, as did the government, that it should not be referred.
there's no conflict. this position is fine by us.
so in fairness, i must tell your lordships,
that the shah faesal judgment is in volume 17.
it's pdf 42. could you repeat that again, please?
volume 17. case law volume, case law volume 17.
yes. pdf 42.
the extract of sampat prakash is at para 40, and sampat prakash's reasoning
is that c.o. 44, which was the 1952 c.o. if your lordships will remember.
that was the one issued under article 370, clause 3.
the 1952 one. thereafter, in 1954 with the constituent assembly, they issued 370(1)(d).
the 1954 order.
now, the 1952 order is proof of the fact that the order itself says
that, we allow 370 to continue to stand except for this modification and that explanation.
your lordships will remember yesterday that explanation, much was being made of it.
so, it was the conscious choice made at that point
in 1952 by the constituent assembly, because that's the threshold,
that's when we are going to go ahead and make the constitution.
now, if we are going to activate 370 clause 3, why embark on this exercise?
we get the entire constitution developed.
but because they made that conscious choice in 1952, they
issued that the one and only order that's ever been
issued under 370 clause 3 until 2019, which is the 1952 order.
now that 1952 order is the reasoning adopted by the sampat
prakash bench to say, since you yourself have taken the decision
that the constitution of india will apply with exceptions and modifications.
and the only exception or modification you have brought in is
that explanation, which was a question that fell in damnoo later.
but, because you yourself have said that, it's
an accepted fact that 370 continues to apply.
that is your conscious choice.
i'm corrected to say, it's a declaration my lords, not an order.
it's a declaration under 370 clause 3.
and at para 44 of shah faesal, para
40 is where this extract of sampat prakash is.
c.o. 44 is referred and at para 44, your lordships have given
that as the reason why you're not referring this to a larger bench.
the third reason given in para 44.
the second again, i'm afraid, i'm sorry for the
broad side, but i have to be accurate on this.
article 357, there was an argument taken by mr. parikh yesterday.
and he was saying that part of it doesn't apply.
in fact, it does.
which, if your lordships recall how they issued these orders under 370(1)(d), was they
chose the part and said the part will apply subject to abc exceptions or modifications.
so they would refer to the article under it and then make those corrections.
if you compare page 18 of volume 3, which is the first order
when 357 was not made applicable, with page 38 pdf of volume 3.
so that's 1952, i think. 54 first and then 1958.
page 38 is 58. they while bringing 370, 357 back, 360 is omitted.
so 357 continues to apply fully.
so it wouldn't be appropriate for us to argue that
357 doesn't apply in the state of jammu and kashmir.
in any event, when you see volume 1, page 188, which
is the documents dealing with how the constitution of india applies
to jammu and kashmir, that page you'll find 357 there as it is.
volume 1, page 188. right? yes. volume 1, page 188.
so my lord the points that i'll deal with i'll just unfold for your lordships.
there are some which i've decided i'll leave for rejoinder.
i won't trouble your lordships with that, because that can come at any stage.
it's not a particular thing that needs to come first up.
my lords on history there are a couple of points that i wanted to make.
in fact, i have put all my oral arguments.
mr. noorani i was reading in the morning when somebody cited noorani's book.
a g noorani has of course criticized the judgment in sampat
prakash on the ground that he says sampat prakash ignores the earlier.
the first judgment. correct that is the argument that was taken.
seeking the reference, but since. now that has been declined.
now that has been declined. i think we'll go by what the judges say.
i believe those judgments do help us.
there are portions of it which have already been read to your lordships.
so i don't think i should trouble your lordships with that.
now what i've done, i just want to let your lordships know because
i could share it with your lordship but i needed your permission first.
i have made a document of my oral arguments, which will.
because i saw your lordships were grappling with going to volume and pages.
so we have taken pictures of each page and put it
in the note itself so you don't have to go anywhere else.
plus there are tables, including what you asked mr. zaffar shah, the comparison.
so the 70 page document comparing the constitution of india, constitution of kashmir and
constitution of jammu and kashmir showing what provisions would continue to apply, which may
be different or in some cases better, as far as jammu and kashmir are concerned.
now i have the document here to make it easier reading if
i'm permitted to share that with you otherwise i can just do
it like this because i know your lordship.this not a written submission.
there are no arguments here. okay, you can.
rather than going to and fro from documents
and volumes, it's all put in one place.
and you have it in the soft form?
soft copy? i have a soft form.
it's ready to email if i can do that.
so we'll label this now, six right?
if it is a one page note it is not a problem.
no, it's not written submission. we would have done it ourselves.
but any. no, i'm saying i put pictures.
the only reason is your lordships. pictures from the existing compilation.
in every place i put volume and page number.
so your lordships can see it's from that volume and page number.
there are no arguments. no arguments at all.
it's just the sequence of. just putting it everything in one place.
yes, one place and for the annexures which is as per everything
here is a response to the questions that came from your lordships
as the last word, everything except one last segment, which is completely
different, but everything else, which is why it's only a response to the questions.
i think we have to assist your lordships now.
it's been sent. it's been shared.
meanwhile, i'll just explain to your lordships how i'm dealing with it.
there's a little bit of history and one i think which is very important,
which is the previous attempt in parliament to omit article 370, in which there
were debates in detail and mr. gulzarilal nanda, who was the home minister then.
this is between his two tenures as interim prime minister.
he as home minister, says that there is no way
that we can go ahead and repeal or omit article 370.
noorani has also referred to that part.
yes.
in fact, i think just before me, mr. baig referred
to that tunnel that came from that answer to that debate.
so the history.
i think some aspects of this history may be relevant to be looked at.
also, some of the speeches given in the jammu and kashmir constituent
assembly, you have seen a few, but i think it rings true.
all of them repeatedly are so happy and they always say
applause and the cheers about the fact that they joined india.
there's no question about any kind of secession, any second thoughts about it
etc. the fact that sheikh abdullah in 1972, after his prolonged incarceration, when
he was to come back and form the government, they entered into an agreement.
sheikh abdullah and mrs. gandhi and it's interesting because that agreement provided
for the fact that there would be no question of you asking
for an abrogation of 370 clause 3, the accession is absolutely complete.
no secession arguments can be taken.
that's also put on record, the sheikh abdullah and indira gandhi agreement.
interestingly indra on behalf of mrs. gandhi the signing of that agreement which
happened the day before he took over as chief minister was done by
mr. parthasarathy who was a famous diplomat, but also was the son of gopalaswami ayyangar.
many ways that you find overlaps throughout, but this history,
i think shows and resonates how from then that day
till now, the interpretation of 370 has been consistent without any departure.
370 clause 3 is the temporary provision.
a choice had to be exercised at that point of
time, which was done and it was over and done.
and the problem is the other way around.
if i may just digress for a minute.
370 clause 1 says article 1 will apply.
you can't make any changes to it, and it starts with a non obstante clause.
370 clause 3 also starts with a limited non obstante
clause, which is not withstanding anything in the provision above.
we are looking at it throughout while the arguments are on, with
the reference to the question of complete integration or the constitution completely applying.
why don't we look at it the other way round.
suppose you had some government at the centre, which for reasons best known
to them have a sympathy to the cause of and say that look,
we will artificially create some assembly to be treated as the constituent assembly.
they will take a decision whether 370 clause 3 can be utilized to abrogate 370.
now, when you abrogate 370, please note that article 1 also goes with it.
the other way around. but there is a problem, mr. sankaranarayanan.
yes. article 1 is a permanent feature of the constitution, right?
absolutely. yes.
now, what was the reason for article 370 clause 1 to
contain a specific reference that article 1of the constitution shall apply?
yes.
article 1 of the constitution was in any case
applicable because that's an embedded part of a constitution.
absolutely .
the reason why they introduced a reference to article 1 in article 370 was for
this that during that interim period when there was a power to modify the provisions
of the constitution those relatable to the instrument of accession with consultation, those not relatable
to the instrument of accession with concurrence, during that period, there would have been a
doubt as to whether or not article 1 could also have been modified with concurrence.
so the object of putting that in article 370 was to redouble
the constitutional statement that article 1 is a permanent feature of the constitution.
now, if article 370 was intended to be permanent, there's
no reason to include article 1 and article 370, because
article 1 any way is a permanent feature of the constitution.
absolutely. you are right.
you see, when we refer to article 370, clause 3, it only refers to 370.
it doesn't refer to article 1. no, it doesn't.
correct. correct. but, 370, which includes within it article 1, compulsorily applying.
but that. if one looks at it.
the argument which you have raised, if one look
at it, what you can abrogate is article 370.
correct. not article 1. that's what i am .
370 goes, the entire constitution becomes as it is applicable to
all the states will become applicable to the state of j&k.
which is why, if i may just read.
suppose. this is not my interpretation. this is the president of india's interpretation.
rajendra prasad. his letter is here. i'll show you the extract.
his interpretation writing to pandit nehru.
but allow me to just show your lordship for a minute.
370. you will never attribute to the constitution.
yes. the use of a surplusage. absolutely.
right?
every word in the constitution.we apply that principle to an ordinary statute of the legislature.
most of the constitution that.
you would never attribute to the constitution makers
any intent use of surplusage or something without meaning.
absolutely.
and the reason why article 1 is specifically referred to in article
370 is that during that interim period, while other provisions could have
been modified, they were very clear that article 1 will not be modified.
absolutely.
which is a clear indicator to the fact
that 370 has never intended to be permanent.
i'm with your lordships. probably your argument could be.
no. no. i'm with your lordships. yeah.
that after the constituent assembly arrived at an understanding,
something further left to be done by the indian constitution.
right. so now. now.which was never done.
and we followed this expedient of the c.o.s, that's what seems to have happened.
it served everybody's purpose.
the government of india could get the work of the government done.
the j&k assembly could have those beneficial provisions of the constitution apply to them.
as the then prime minister nehru said that it's now reduced to a shell.
that's what he said.
now, as a result of what this seems to have therefore been a very convenient
expedient of having c.o.'s to apply the constitution to jammu and kashmir and progressively bring
j&k into the mainstream and integrate it fully on whatever issues that were left out.
but possibly, these are clear indicators within, intrinsic to article 370 that these were
in the sense of pro tem provisions until some further action would be taken.
that's absolutely right.
in fact, if your lordships would see from
379 onwards, fortunately, this book is there now.
they've all been repealed. 379 to 390.
those are also pro tem provisions, dealing with the provisions of parliament.
in fact, the converse of. yes.
the converse of what was shown to your lordships earlier, about
the explanation provided jammu and kashmir, of where the constituent assembly
of jammu and kashmir would conduct itself as the legislative assembly.
the identical provision is article 379, which stands repealed, which is that the
constituent assembly of india would be the provisional parliament and they would elect
the president of india for the time being, etc. now, those are pro tem provisions.
i'll show your lordships, that in detail.
but on this point, the question i ask myself is
370 clause 3 provides, and those opening words are very important.
'notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this article'.
now that i think segues exactly with what my lord, chief justice said.
wouldn't this be surplusage? what was the need for these words?
the need in my view, for these words, because what is it in
the provisions above that are standing in the way of 370 clause 3?
it appears that 370 clause 1 has excluded
the possibility of article 1 and article 370.
238 anyway, had gone by then.
of these two provisions being in any way the subject matter
of orders under 370 clause 1, sub-clause d. it had excluded it.
what 370 clause 3, and i had to
look at it keeping two things in mind.
2023, when i'm making this argument and the fact that sampat
prakash as well as your lordships have held that this position
of 370(1)(d) being operationalized is the position, that's the correct position.
there's no way of questioning it.
if i keep those two parameters in mind, the constituent assembly sitting in
1952, is faced with the choice which is provided under 370 clause 3.
which is, that notwithstanding anything in the provisions above, you have to
decide whether you want to keep 370 alive in some form, with
exceptions or modifications, or do you want to junk it as a whole?
now, if they were to take that other choice, and we are
grateful that they didn't, but if it was a question of doing
so, what is the impact on the article 1 not being made applicable?
what is the impact on it?
the way i see it, the impact is and it's an unfortunate answer, the
impact is that article 1 wouldn't apply to them if they had decided so.
and in my view, that's the danger of recreating a constituent assembly at any point.
article 368 in our constitution doesn't permit repeal of the constitution.
please see.
it says amend, modify, repeal any provision of the constitution, not the constitution itself.
and after the basic structure has come, there's no question of that.
now, what is our fear with this constituent assembly argument?
it would be very difficult for this court to give a verdict
on the constituent assembly being resurrected as far as the state of
kashmir is concerned, and in a future date, tell us that no,
that's a principle that applies to kashmir, it doesn't apply to constituent assembly of india.
my view is, it applies squarely to the constituent assembly of india.
there is no question of suddenly reviving or
resurrecting the constituent assembly of india in any fashion.
it's done for. what you want to do, you do by amending this constitution.
this is something we and our forebearers have tied ourselves down to.
that's the idea behind the basic structure.
there is no way of incremental modifications being made by virtue of resurrecting constituent assemblies.
this case is effectively about, one, whether a power exists, and two,
has the procedure laid down for the exercise of that power been followed.
in article 3, for example, there's a question that
justice kaul put to mr. chander uday singh yesterday.
converting a state into union territory is a lack of source
of power, that doesn't exist in the constitution, it can't be done.
but, subject to what justice kaul said yesterday, can you take
a part of a state and convert it into union territory?
yes, you can. article 3 provides for it.
but there is a procedure for exercise of that power.
that procedure has not been followed. i hope i'm making myself clear.
so there's a source of power, whether it exists or not.
and then there is the exercise of that power.
the same argument applies to article 370.
does the prospect of creating a constituent assembly exist today vis-a-vis kashmir, or vis-a-vis india?
no. my answer is a square no. that's not
provided for in the constitution, therefore, it doesn't exist.
in any event and without prejudice to that argument, the exercise of the
power and the manner of exercise of that power is one of the
most fraudulent invidious exercises that we have seen in this country since 1970.
and why do i say 1970?
in 1970, when they wanted to get rid of
the privy process, they moved up constituent assembly bill.
amendment bill. that bill went to the lok sabha and passed through the lok sabha.
it went to the rajya sabha and it was defeated by one vote, one vote.
and then what did they do? overnight the president issues an order under article 366.
definition, provision of the rulers and uses that power
to say, from tomorrow onwards there are no rulers.
all your privy processes. what have they done differently today?
they just use the next provision. they used 367.
and your lordships came down like a ton of bricks on them.
nine is to two you held against that kind of an action.
and i want to show your lordships madhavrao scindia, because i believe it squarely applies.
they finally had to go back to the drawing board.
they had to come with a constitutional amendment that
constitutional amendment was sustained in raghunathrao ganpatrao 20 years later.
but the fact is, following procedures or laid down in the
constitution are sanctified mechanisms which protect us, which protect this constitution.
the sovereignty doesn't go to the executive.
the executive is a creature of the constitution, as is this court.
the people are the sovereigns under our constitution.
let there be no doubt about that.
because i believe that there is some feeling which is the
same feeling that the government had at the time of madhavrao scindia.
that some level of paramountcy, some level of sovereignty had devolved on the executive.
so an executive has some residue power by which they will interpret the constitution differently.
they will use definition clauses where they can't touch it directly.
my lord, justice khanna on day one was considering the
proviso to article 370 and said, look, that's a proviso.
but the proviso is perhaps the most important thing in this constitution.
constitutional amendments in this country have been struck down on only two grounds.
only two. one was basic structure, the other was a proviso.
the proviso in 368(2) was the reason why,
in kihoto hollohon para 7 was struck down.
again, the amendments that were brought in for cooperative societies,
your lordships struck down because it didn't meet with 368(2).
i remember my lord, the chief justice mentioning on day one
about 368(2) proviso, can you use that by way of 356 route?
i think that's a fantastic question. that's the heart of this case.
can you do that? can you use 367?
can use 366? can you go sideways?
the proviso provides the procedure you will follow and you
creature and servant of the constitution will use no other procedure.
we are not sitting here in deference to our equals.
our elected representative have taken a choice.
they've made a choice that they will follow the constitution.
their oaths bind them to it.
and they decided to follow devices like this and
they possibly don't learn from the lessons of the past.
and i want to show your lordships the language of justice
hidayatullah, justice shah in majority and justice hegde conquering in madhavrao.
it completely, in my view, covers this case fully.
it's the exact same thing. in fact, it's less complicated.
less experimental. but i'll come to that.
that's the history part.
on 370 because these words are very, very important in our constitution.
we can't read them as out of context, specific provisions with specific words.
the words temporary, the words consultation, concurrence, necessary,
recommend, the non obstante clause, even the colon.
there are three colons in article 370.
all of these are found in other parts of the constitution.
so if your lordships were to look at this provision in isolation, and
interpret it without at the very least considering the other provisions where similar
words are used, we would have a problem that will arise on a
future date, which is why i want to address your lordships on those.
then on the frauds on the constitution and the measures which keep those provisions intact.
three of them, in particular, the ordinance making powers, which are exceptional.
the expressions your lordships have used are 'necessary evils but with safeguards'.
and what is that safeguard? that it will be temporary.
immediately after the legislature comes in, the legislature will look at the
ordinance and decide whether they want to continue or not, as they
have done in recent weeks, as far as the nct of delhi is concerned.
article 356, about how it will be exercised, there are safeguards in the constitution.
and see the orders they passed under 356.
they suspend the legislative assembly. once they suspend.
and suspend has no other meaning in law.
it has absolutely no other meaning in law,
except that it is for a fixed time period.
it's in the interregnum. it's between two things.
i haven't terminated. i haven't ended, killed, murdered, buried at 9ft-6ft under.
i haven't done any of those things.
it's just suspension. what is effect of that order today?
exercising 356. they suspended the legislative assembly and poof.
disappeared. what happened to it?
these are series of abuses of the constitution which has taken place in this case.
and finally my lords, there is one aspect which
i thought is interesting and disturbing at the same time.
in 2018.
coincidentally, just a month before the events, which transpired
here began, our friends across the border did something unusual.
pakistan occupied kashmir - they have another name for it -
and gilgit-baltistan are the two areas which pakistan claims as its own.
in their constitution there's no reference to that as part of their territory.
and i think advisedly so for their sake, because they still harbour
some hopes that there would be some accession of kashmir to them.
in 2018, they decided one, to pass an amendment to
the 1974 interim constitution for as they call it azad kashmir.
the other thing they did, was in the same month
they decided to pass a geo with reference to gilgit-baltistan,
which is the other area which is also across the border.
all part of erstwhile kashmir or continues to be part of kashmir.
in fact section 47 jammu and kashmir's constitution you will find
a reference that the territory of kashmir has defined in the.
in the constitution is the territory as it was on 15th august 1947,
which is the entirety of it without the 75,000 km, having gone to pakistan.
both those, that amendment and that order, what it did was
to take away the right of self governance that the people
in those two areas had and to vest it in themselves.
as far as gilgit baltistan is concerned, it was challenged with the high court.
high court allowed the challenge.
it was reversed by the supreme court, which strangely substituted the impugned order,
which had been passed by the government with an order of its own.
effectively, what the government there has done is to rest direct
control and vest it in a council with the prime minister.
i asked myself that question, isn't india different?
are we not a democratic country, run by a constitution?
do we not adhere to certain promises that we make and which are covenanted
in the constitution as a solemn promise on which five constitution benches have weighed in?
or are we going to follow the ill-advised example
of people who put their prime ministers in jail?
now, if your lordships have that note.
i am not sure if it's been uploaded.
sorry. sorry.
if your lordships can, then just skip quickly down to page 2 my lords.
i won't take long. i've just given the outline already.
from page 2 onwards, i'll just quickly just read up the headlines.
this is the sequence in which things panned out.
cabinet mission memorandum on state treaties and paramountcy, that was in may 1976.
the second para there refers to how the
rights returned to the states from the crown.
this is important, apropos what your lordships had earlier observed on sovereignty.
so what the british crown had taken, the british crown gave back to the states.
so after that, it was between the states and
the new government of india to enter into whatever arrangements.
which is why the government of india act 1935 had to be amended.
this is echoed by the cabinet mission at the bottom of that page.
next is the negotiating committee. this is on behalf of the princes.
that's point number c. then mr. vallabhbhai patel's
statement in july, a month before independence my lords.
if i can read the last three lines
of the first paragraph and the second paragraph.
'we ask no more of them than accession on these three subjects
in which the common interests of the country are involved. in other
matters, we would scrupulously respect the autonomous existence.' next para, last three lines again.
'nor would it be my policy to conduct the relations of the
new department with the states in any manner which savours the domination
of one over the other. if there would be any domination, it
would be that of our mutual interests and welfare.' then the indian independence act.
these are the two relevant sections. then the government of india act.
the amendments i've referred to my lords, that's 5, 6, 290 and 290(a).
h. this is the three routes which are set out in the white paper.
h. the integration of states did not follow a uniform pattern in all cases.
merger of states in the provinces geographically contiguous to them was one form of integration.
the second was the conversion of states into centrally administered areas, and the third,
the integration of the territories to create new, viable units known as unions of states.
each of these forms has been adopted according to size, geography,
and other factors relating to each state or group of states.
if your lordships were to tap on refer
table 2, it will take you to a table.
if you just tap on that. now that table splits the states into three types.
states that envisage their own constituent assembly, which are madhya bharat, pepsu, and rajasthan.
second, states that ultimately formed a constituent assembly.
and there are quite a few of those.
there's mysore, jammu and kashmir, junagarh, saurashtra and travancore and cochin
so, because this question of constituent assembly came up, your lordships
need to know that there were these four states, which had constituent assemblies.
but how three of them decided to go
ahead with the indian constitution after extended negotiation.
the fourth one was jammu and kashmir.
the table below shows your lordships each, i'm sorry, my lord.
justice kaul has that? yes.
the table below has princely state, the date of the
instrument of accession and a supplementary instrument, if at all,
the constituent assembly, if any, the remarks against that and the source.
i've given your lordships the volume and the pdf number.
and we have shown how jammu and kashmir is the only
one where the constituent assembly went ahead and formed the constitution.
i'm not going to take more time.
your lordships will see the table whenever you have leisure and.
if your lordships have any leisure.
can you click on, back on top to take you back to the beginning?
at the top of the page it says,
back on top on the top right hand.
if you just tap on that, it'll take you back to the note.
the next was supplementary instruments. i'm sorry.
my lord, justice gavai, you have the note?
i'm sorry, could i assist if there's any difficulty?
yes my lords, are you back? page 4 i think, page 4.
after table 2. after table 2. yes.
(i) supplementary instrument. i'm sorry? starts with constituent assemblies.
para 2? yes, yes. page 4 my lords, bottom.
we in fact, looked at the guidelines the court had issued yesterday for
written submissions, etc., which says pdf and page numbers has to be the same.
so we tried to align that. you are reading the white paper na?
yes my lords. that states with constituent assemblies.
there are those two bullet points below that.
seven princely states. your lordships have that?
bottom of page 4. now committee. yes.
we saw sardar patel's statement. now where are we?
yes. bottom of page 4. states with constituent assemblies.
your lordships have that? yes. so these just give you the data points.
7 had covenants to form constituent assemblies.
4 formed them.
and then the next page top, page 5 top is extract from the white paper.
'in existence, namely saurashtra, travancore, cochin and mysore. the saurashtra constituent assembly adopted
the draft constitution in its entirety. the other two constitution making bodies proposed
a few amendments. some of these were incorporated in the amendments finally accepted
by the constituent assembly of india. others were dropped as a result of
discussion with the delegation of these assemblies.' next para deals with kashmir, specifically.
'the state has therefore,'. i'm sorry, your lordships have that?
yes.
'the state has therefore been included.' 'the state has therefore been included
in part b states. in view of the special problems arising in
respect of the state and the fact that the government of india
have assured its people that they would themselves finally determine their political
future, the following special provision has been made in the constitution.' and 370 is extracted.
your lordship can see the first part of 370.
now there is after that from the j&k constituent assembly debates.
mr. baig speaking in the constituent assembly also mentions why it is exceptional.
why 370 is unique. 'why was a special position?'.
your lordships have that? bottom of the page.
'why was a special position granted to kashmir. it is because of its special
character and the struggle for freedom which the people of kashmir have led. kashmir.'.
sorry. 'kashmir let.' i'm sorry. the second sentence there.
kashmir, let me say, is the only state with this composition of population,
which chose voluntarily to accede to india, and we are happy about it.
within brackets. cheers. this is the first reason.
secondly, kashmir has a strong popular movement behind
it, for which it fought for 21 years.
that movement was for the establishment of communal harmony and welfare of the masses.
kashmir has therefore, a definite socioeconomic program of its own.
as an honourable member of this house has said it is with a view
to implement that program that we acceded to india, and we maintain special position.
in order to implement that program by common consent and
agreement during the time of sardar patel and other leaders.
and other leaders of india, special position was given to us.
therefore, any question of having given this special position
to us for a temporary period does not arise.
it was never given to us because our question is hanging fire
in the un, or because pakistan put forward its right over kashmir.
but because of the reason i have mentioned.
it is a special position and taking it
away will clearly be betraying the people of kashmir.
we made our mind clear to india and
i'm glad it was understood by the indian government.
honourable members of this house have expressed their doubts as
regards residuary powers, etc. then dr. rajendra prasad's note as president.
this is sent to prime minister nehru on 6 september '52. there can be
no doubt that article 370 and particularly clause 3 thereof, is of an exceptional
nature. while its, excuse me, while its safeguards in clause 2, the right of
the constituent assembly of jammu and kashmir to revise or annul any action taken
by the government of that state in giving concurrence under clause 1(b)(ii), and the
second proviso to clause (1)(d) of article 370. it excludes altogether the parliament of
india from having any say regarding the constitution of jammu and kashmir and places
full power in the hands of the government, including the power to amend the
constitution of india. it is therefore necessary to examine the wording of this peculiar
clause with some care for a correct application of the comprehensive terms that, parliament
could never have intended that such an extraordinary power of amending the constitution by
executive order was to be enjoyed without any limitation as to number of times
on which it could be exercised, or as to the period within which it
was exercisable, or as to the scope and extent of the modifications and exceptions
that could be made. it cannot be seriously maintained that for all time to
come the application of our constitution to jammu & kashmir would derive its authority
from article 370 to the complete exclusion of parliament. the marginal note to article
370 itself describes the nature of the article as temporary provision with respect to
the state of jammu and kashmir. please mark this my lord. the conclusion, therefore,
seems to me to be irresistible that clause 3 of article 370 was not
intended to be used from time to time. the correct view appears to be
that recourse is to be had to this clause only when
the constituent assembly of the state has been fully framed. so
it's a one-time exercise as far as 370 clause 3 is concerned.
i know it's troubling your lordships about 370 being a temporary provision.
our case, at least my case, 370 clause 3 is a
one-time decision making exercise to be carried out by the constituent assembly.
if abrogation is to be done, it's to be done once
and if it's done, 370 is out of the window, no problem.
but, if they did what they did in 1952 and decided to have their
own constitution, 370(1)(d) then continues to operate, and has been utilized precisely as that.
and that's why sampat prakash said it's permissible.
mr. gopal sankaranarayanan, this entire version can be read differently also, against you also,
that it was made as per dr. rajendra prasad, that there'll be, clause 3
will be adopted and applied by the constituent assembly and it will be abrogated forever.
it can be read that way also.
if we read it, if we read it carefully, that's the.
even if i were to read it like that.
that's the. one thing is very clear.
he says that it can. just read what you have said.
i've read that. i've read that.
so he is very clear about one thing, about taking out
clause 3 and referring to it, that he is very clear about.
he's also very clear about it not being used repeatedly.
no no, i'm saying there's no two ways.
i don't think the president of india was under any
misapprehension of what the constituent assembly of jammu & kashmir was.
if you read the first portion. yes.
probably the entire context in which he is saying is, this there article 370
will probably not see the light of the day after constitution assembly of j&k.
the abrogation. .exercises the power under clause 3 of the.
it is temporary to the extent of abrogation.
to that extent.
to the rest of it, which is why 370 clause 2 is transitory.
370 clause 3. i'm not for a moment suggesting what the interpretation should be.
no, no i agree. its food for thought.
what i am only trying to point out is there are two ways to
look at the speech in the context in which contextual interpretation is to be adopted.
if your lordships were then to see the entirety, because
what i've extracted is page 774 and page 778, 779.
if i read the entirety of it, which will take
some time, i don't think your lordship will be left.
we will examine that. we will examine.
i leave it to your lordships to examine.
just see the whole letter. there's no doubt.
there are three things that the president does.
he takes a 370 clause-3. tries to understand its implication.
he refers specifically to constituent assembly, and he makes it
clear that this is not a step that can be repeated.
those are three things that i adopt.
now i have made a reference here my lords.
this is only because the entire history with reference to all these
aspects were also culled out by justice hidayatullah in madhavrao scindia's judgment.
so i've referred here, but your lordship may just jot
on the side, paras 5 to 15 of volume 6.
it is here only. volume 6. pdf pages 419-425.
pdf pages? pdf pages 419-425. where is madhavroa scindia?
it's written here. your lordships can see.
it's volume 6. we need not do this.
starts at 390. it starts at page 390.
pdf 390. mr. sankaranarayanan, you've given us a 143 page note.
that's only a table. your lordships 60 pages of that is that constitution comparison.
i'm not even going to take you through it.
i'm just putting it because you need to have the material, because
all of this couldn't have come in our written submissions in advance.
when your lordships put those questions saying, we want
to see the comparison, we had to respond to that.
so i'm not. i'm not going into any of that.
how much more time, mr. sankaranarayanan? i will wrap up my lords, i'll wrap up.
i'm just going quickly. that's why i'm not showing your lordships too much.
so this was primarily to show the unique nature of kashmir.
i am sorry my lords.
in fact it's interesting that for kashmir we had a ministry in the union government.
the kashmir affairs ministry which was headed by
ayyangar but for everything else, it was sardar patel.
and apparently there was a little bit of.
kind of discomfiture between the two of them about that.
so kashmir's unique position and the reason why i'm saying this is because in the
second nct judgment, your lordships have unanimously looked at 239aa in delhi as being not
just a simple union territory like the rest of them, but being a little different.
i'm canvassing the same for kashmir. it's very clearly different.
there is a different arrangement. its inception was different.
it's birth was different. it's life has been different.
it's got a constitution. it's been running 70 years.
now if you're going to upset it on a mere ipse dixit overnight, there's obviously
some basic procedures and protections which are provided in the constitution have to be met.
that's all we're saying.
we are not saying that you can't do
this, especially when we have reached this far.
in 1908.
i'm sorry to digress, but in 1908 in the marathon in the olympics, there
was an italian man who was a mail man who took part in the olympics.
yes. his name was dorando pietri.
dorando pietri reached after finishing the entire 42 kilometre stretch reached the stadium.
and i think it was paris, and he ran into the stadium
and then he was so exhausted and dehydrated that he was collapsing.
so thrice the empire's referees people who are standing near helped him pass the
finish line and he came first and then they stripped him off his medal.
they said that you took help and the rules
don't permit you taking any help of any sort, whatsoever.
but he did the running himself and they disqualified him.
the reason i'm mentioning this is, this is pretty
much where kashmir had come with adopting india's constitution.
we had entered the stadium.
kashmir had entered the stadium, which was near the finish line.
there was an illegitimate assistance given to get
it past the finish line which is completely unnecessary.
completely uncalled for, contrary to procedure, you lose a gold medal as a consequence.
also my lords, the promises that were made
at the beginning of the constitution as against now.
there was the people of kashmir through the constituent assembly
took the decision not to anyway adopt, exercise article 370 clause.
mr. sankaranarayanan, can we not. i mean, just as a hypothesis.
it's sort of worrying me and that's why
i'm putting it to you at this point.
maybe a little digression. yes.
can we not possibly read article 370 as indicating two terminal points?
yes.
the first terminal point is in clause 2 of article 370 namely, the formation
of the constituent assembly of the state for the purpose of framing the constitution.
framing the constitution. that's correct.
the second terminal point is indicated in the proviso to clause 3.
yes. that again, refers to the recommendation of the constituent assembly.
correct.
interestingly, 370 is silent on what the regime should be
once the constituent assembly is formed and has taken a decision.
that is right. which is why two views.
there is complete silence. yes. right?
if there is complete silence in article 370, then 370 possibly.
possible interpretation, has worked itself out both in relation
to clause 1 and in relation to 2 and 3.
that's a possibility. right? in which case once that happens then we have two options.
yes. your line of thinking would be then.
but therefore, then the constitution of the state
of jammu and kashmir will fill in the void.
and that will trump. and that will be the supreme document.
yes.
the other view possibly is, can the constitution of a
federating unit ever rise about the source of the federating unit?
because we've always sort of presumed because the c.o.s
sort of led us up a certain line of thinking.
yes. that may have been done. that may have.
and we are not saying at all that is unconstitutional.
it would be very, very improper. i mean, not improper.
but obviously, these are statesmen who have operated this nation for the last 70 years.
and we shouldn't say that they did something which is unconstitutional.
they did that to sort of further the course of governance in the nation.
that's what the judgement in sampat prakash.
they did that to further the course of governance in the nation.
but if the terminal point is 370 is the constituent assembly's work, then
is it not necessary that the work of the constituent assembly of the
state of j&k has to be embodied in this constitution to make it operational?
it's not necessary because it's not provided for by the constitution.
the constitution looks at the . depending on what view of our federation we take.
and if that is not so. yes.
then is it not also possible to a
construction and where was all this exercise necessary?
abrogation and everything. yes. abrogation postulates that it continues.
could be yes.
as we also said that they applied 371
even post 1957 by all those c.o.s. correct.
but if 370 works itself out. no, if it works itself out.
i'm with your lordship.
i think we must rethink all these different ways of looking at it.
but if it works itself out, it can't be touched thereafter.
it's worked itself out. it exists in the constitution.
no. it doesn't exist in the constitution.
no. it's a provision. i am depending on the text.
no. without being able to. it's completely.
but the text. it is there in the constitution.
yes. but it's a provision of the constitution, which itself points out its self-limiting character.
right? so it's not obliterated.
but if the text itself shows its self-limiting character then
the very operation of 370 has to come into come
to an end once the constituent assembly of the state was formed.
and that is a key reason why both 2 and the proviso to 3.
but you are in a way, possibly right.
we will have to of course.
when i say you are right, it's part of the process of reflection.
we have only finished half the arguments in the case.
we are on the anvil of finishing half the arguments.
that the proviso to 3, when he speaks of.
it doesn't say. what does it say.
declared that this article shall cease to be operative
or shall be operative only with such exceptions or modifications.
yes. this exceptions or modification finds itself, find expression 2 parts of this article 370.
yes.
clause d. d refers to subject to such
exceptions and modifications as the president may specify.
yes. the second is clause 3. yes.
shall be operative only with such exceptions and modifications, as he may specify.
yes. so, if you see, a, 238 will not apply.
if 238, 238 applied the part, was part 6 of the constitution.
part 6 of the constitution dealt with the executive, the
legislature, the governor, the high courts, and the subordinate courts.
so there are five provisions of part 6.
that will not apply. if that will not apply, what would apply?
it can't be that there was no executive, governor,
legislature, high court or subordinate courts in jammu and kashmir.
1939 arrangement would apply. alright?
that's an indication of it's being a very pro-tem sort of a measure.
then, parliament may modify.
parliament may make laws with respect to those which
are covered in the, in the instrument of accession.
that's described in part of parliament. for parliament.
yes.
then such of the other provisions of this constitution, then comes article 1 will apply.
yes. right? then d says such of the other provisions.
now, which are the other provisions?
otherwise, other than what is stated in clauses a to
c, that is 238, power of parliament to make laws.
article 1. yes.
such of the other provisions will apply with
such modifications and exceptions that the president may make.
yes. alright?
no such matter which pertains to the clause 2 will
be made unless it has the concurrence of the state.
yes. then why does 2 come in?
2 comes in that, in case the consent was given before
the constituent assembly were formed, place it before the constituent assembly.
the terminal point of clause 2 is a constituent assembly.
what does 3 say?
notwithstanding anything in this article, notwithstanding not anything in the constitution, but in this
article, the president may declare that this article will not apply, not any other provision.
3. 3 in my view overrides 2 and 1.
absolutely. 3 stands right at the very top.
because of the notwithstanding non obstante clause.
which is why, just see the 1952 order for a minute.
right. which is in terms of 3.
right. 1952 order therefore, will be the only order before 2019 which applied clause 3.
correct. the point now is this.
that is there not intrinsic evidence that 370 itself is
self-limiting, once the constituent assembly has come to an end?
as far as we are concerned, 370 clause
3 comes to an end with the constituent assembly.
that's our argument. but then the point is this.
then do we say that our constitution might be so
read to treat the constitution of j&k as an overriding,
as an overriding document which will apply in preference to our constitution?
if you see the constitution of jammu and kashmir, it defers to the indian constitution.
absolutely. you're absolutely right. it only makes small nominal changes, and all.
in this case, really speaking, though the constitution of j&k framed its, framed its relationship
with the union of india, unless that relationship was embodied in the indian constitution, how
will it bind the dominion of india, or the successive parliaments or the executive here?
for the simple reason that when the indian constitution specifically recognizes a constituent
assembly for only one state in the country, and says that constituent assembly
has the task of deciding to abrogate the clause or not, the constituent
assembly and its task, which is described in clause 2, is constitutionally recognized.
so the fact that there is a constitution coming
at the end of this is an obvious corollary.
does that mean that therefore anything that was said by the constituent assembly
of j&k, would bind the nation, bind parliament, or bind the executive here?
it couldn't.
it had to be embodied subsequent to 1957, in a
binding arrangement reflected in our constitution, which was never done.
everybody started working on a working arrangement.
the idea was to sort of gradually bring j&k into the mainstream.
therefore, they didn't want to do that.
which is thankfully what has happened and which is why if we take the
extreme position that there is no question of 370 subclause 1 continue after 1957.
if i can show your lordships. sorry.
mr. sankar now i think 3:40 we'll finally wrap
up and give them 20 minutes to start opening the.
this is not anything that has been said before, which is why i'm saying it.
in fact i abandoned this interpretation of 370 except to say one last thing.
370 clause 3 says president may. so 370 clause 3 need never have been operationalized.
please note that.
if the recommendation didn't come from the constituent assembly at any
stage, then the president would have nothing to decide a recommendation on.
so while the constituent assembly was on, if 370 clause 3 sat there quietly
in the waiting room and was never called in and then the constituent assembly
went after the constitution came in, 370 clause 3 would expire there without it
ever having been operationalized because there was a question of may, necessary, recommendation, constituent assembly.
with those 4 absent there's no question then of it being operationalized.
but your lordship's question on jammu and kashmir constitution being recognized here.
the jammu and kashmir constitution refers to the
constitution of india as it goes through its avatars.
that's in the definitional clause. there are several articles that refer to the indian constitution.
all the c.os that came after 1954 and including '54, refers to the
constitution of jammu and kashmir. so as mr. subramanium said, there is a
bridge and that acknowledgment is there even in correspondences which have been shown,
to that extent. but the answer has to be, no. if your lordship's
question is, is the constitution of jammu and kashmir referred to in the constitution?
no, it's not. but it's understood that it's there.
it's a classic federal situation, like in the us, where states have their
own constitutions, flags etc., etc. now, the next point my lords, page 8.
this is the earlier attempt to abrogate article 370.
if your lordship sees this is to omit article 370.
just a couple of paras. this is on the right side.
if your lordships will see sri nanda.
right side column at page 8.
he is the home minister at that point and let me
just show your lordships after the extract, and this extract is important.
i don't know if your lordships were shown that 368
has a proviso in its application to jammu and kashmir.
now, because of that proviso, i have to
differ a little bit from mr. sibal's interpretation.
when your lordships asked, what are the ways they could
have done it, if they didn't adopt 370 clause 3?
my response on that day and this, is 370 sub-clause (1)(d) is the
only way they could have done it by following the procedure under (1)(d).
what they would have to do under (1)(d) is as follows.
first, they would have to get rid of this proviso under
368 because the proviso requires that every time india's constitution is amended.
they have not done it, they have not done it.
they haven't done it.
if they do it, we'll see how it is to be tested.
that's all. yes.
the reason i'm giving the solution to the government you are not an
advisory jurisdiction to tell them how to do it, how not to do it.
i know, but the reason i need to tell them how to do it.
not for my sake or theirs, but to.
but what they have done is correctly done or not.
i agree. you have to give them advices they not do it.
we will determine could they do it or could they not do it.
at this stage, if they need your advice they
will ask you to do it in another manner.
very well.
so he won't, i may. the reason is that it troubles your lordships' conscience.
and i can understand why, if there was absolutely no way
of totally integrating kashmir with india, that was never at all considered.
there is a legitimate way. they know what the legitimate way is.
it is happening. it's happening over a period of time.
c. o.s have been issued . then it'll come to its logical conclusion.
it is just that the further movement of the remaining
assimilation could have been done by this method or not.
that's what we are deciding.
that's exactly what we're saying and that is why mr. nanda
gives the reasoning next page, if your lordship sees page 9.
this qualification, or this proviso, which excludes the scope of amendments to 370
without certain steps having been taken under 370 itself we cannot amend the constitution.
those steps have not been taken, and therefore
this bill will suffer from an inherent disability.
this may be taken up later on, if need be, and if necessary.
but apart from this, i can leave the rest of that.
next para, this is important.
the position is this while the rest of the contents of the
constitution to which i've made reference negates the application of the provisions
of constitution to jammu and kashmir, some of them, by extension, others directly.
the only avenue of taking the constitution into jammu &
kashmir is through the application of the provisions of article 370.
that is the only way of bringing back the constitution in j&k.
that is my reading of the constitution.
then the sentence about the tunnel.
and i say, may i submit to him and the other friends that article
370 is neither a wall nor a mountain, but that it is a tunnel.
and he explains further that, at the bottom of the page, why he thinks
370 is beautifully conceived, etc., etc. i won't spend any more time on that.
on, the next is my interpretation on 370.
there are a few tables which are annexed to it.
the first is with reference to temporary.
if you click on table 7 my lords, it shows all the temporary
and transitional provisions, as on 26 january 1950, in part 21 of the constitution.
i've included those which have subsequently been repealed by the 7th amendment.
but all of these, and the second column
shows which are temporary , which are transitional.
the head of the chapter, if your lordship
may note, initially said only temporary and transitional .
special came later, by way of an amendment.
so it wasn't there initially. there were only temporary and transitional.
and these are the provisions. your lordships can go back to top.
also, because i think, perhaps we shouldn't pay too much attention to this marginal
note and temporary troubling us, because there are many provisions across the constitution outside
of part 21, which are also temporary in nature, which is in table 8.
and the last column in table 8, if you click on table 8,
the last column shows what those provisions are predicated on until a law
is made by parliament, etc., etc. for example, appointment of the election commission.
your lordships found that there was a void.
and until the law is made the lordships provided a mechanism.
now the government realized that mechanism should have
come much earlier, so they've made a law.
the time periods. just for a minute, if you see 334, article 334.
anglo indians. their reservation has come to an end.
70 years has been substituted and remained substituted.
but for the sc/st, they made it 80 years.
so that's a temporary provision. it was allowed as long as those extensions existed.
i won't spend any more time on that.
but just to say that when your lordships look at it.
73(ii) is not a temporary provision.
these are not, article 73(ii), these are not temporary provisions.
these are provisions which will continue unless varied by
any law of parliament, but these are not temporary.
correct. no, no, unless an action is taken.
so, similar to 370 clause 3, where the action had
to be taken by the constituent assembly, but didn't happen.
similarly here, where parliament has to make a law, but doesn't make
a law, it becomes predicated on an action by one of the instruments.
that's all.
so we are pointing out that the other parts of
the constitution, like when you say 70 years, there's no doubt.
it initially said ten years, for the reservation, so that ten years is temporary.
otherwise, they wouldn't put a time period on it at all.
and i shouldn't give them more ideas.
but they shouldn't put a time period on this, the reservation would go on forever.
so, the marginal note.
kesavananda's four judgements we have put there, which show
that marginal note can really be used as an aid.
it is only on the temporary part of it.
then if your lordship sees para 2 on page 10, i've referred
to table 1, which are the constituent provisions applicable to jammu and kashmir.
just for a minute if you click on that, i'm just rushing now.
this is, your lordships have it on the screen.
this gives you an example.
the ones in green are the important provisions relating to jammu & kashmir.
so the first column is the provision of indian constitution, second column
is that which was made applicable to jammu & kashmir with what
modification and the last column is the supplementing provisions of jammu & kashmir constitution.
it makes a very important reading because there are a few topics
on which they had exercised their rights to have exceptions or modifications.
those are largely, those are the ones in green.
territory, permanent residence, property rights. fundamental duties have not been adopted there.
directive principles.
they have what seems to be a more robust
set of directive principles than we do, in their constitution.
lok sabha representation, services, consent for 352, 356,
358, then 367 and 368 and schedule 7.
these are the broadly, the ones in green.
this is 60 pages. this document.
my associates have spent a lot of time going provision by provision of all
three to make sure that it can be an exhaustive table that's set up.
if your lordships come back to the note, consultation and concurrence.
now these phrases used elsewhere in the constitution and it can't be
that for the purpose of 370(1)(d), where the impugned note notification has
come, that you've treated it so casually because there is this particular
purport and the direction when you seek consultation and you get concurrence.
in the demonetisation case justice gavai was part of the bench and
speaking through him, para 245 talks about the different types of consultation.
these paras are set out. i'm not reading them.
second is the consultation which your lordships in as far as appointment of judges in
both scora as well as the special reference, you've read consultation in a particular way.
so there is a meeting of minds.
now it may not be the 124 interpretation that you have to
have but you have some basic meeting of minds as with the
rbi in the demonetisation case, as between the collegium and the government.
here a certain meeting of minds.
that meeting of minds doesn't mean your mind meeting your own mind.
it has to mean some entity outside of yourself.
you can't by this device of 356, say, what do you
think about this, and then tell yourself, oh, it's a great idea.
somebody else has to do that for you.
and that's what they have sidestepped and they've done
it in the constitution, which is why it's shocking.
this is not some order by an executive of hearing.
this is a constitutional amendment that you have
effectively wrought about by way of this device.
in article 338(b)(9), which deals with the obcs and the commission required for that.
your lordships in the maratha reservation case, said that the consultation there is mandatory.
when you decide to add the marathas to the lists, you should have consulted.
you didn't consult.
now all these are example examples of where else
in the constitution you have consultation and what it means.
and you're weighed in, in constitution bench after constitution bench up to nine
judges repeatedly you have weighed in to say, this is what it means.
this is the meeting of minds. that's completely thrown overboard by what they have done.
importance of the proviso i have mentioned these two judgments.
kihoto and rajendra shah.
colons, the indoor development constitution bench links the proviso to the main provision.
so there's no question about that.
recommendation, we have a table on recommendation, etc., etc. which is table 6.
which shows the many places in the constitution where the word recommend is used
and what its implications are and it's necessary because it provides a kind of balance.
a recommends to b. b can't set up a to recommend to
b. a independently recommends to b and that's also been thrown overboard.
the non obstante clause in article 370 is very, very important.
this non obstante clause effectively trumps the other provisions
in the constitution, which don't have non obstante clauses.
3- 356, 367 all don't have non obstante clauses.
now why does 370 say, notwithstanding anything in this constitution?
it is so that in a situation where any of these other
provisions could be in conflict, 370 is the one that will prevail.
which is why we have set out what those provisions are.
the first bullet point talks about to article 3, that proviso which is in the.
if i can show in para 8, on page 15 just how article 367.
366 was misused in madhavrao scindia. 367 is being misused here.
just see 367 you please note, falls in part 19 my lords.
so it's not covered by 368(2) proviso.
so everything in 368(2) proviso, which needs half the states
to give its consent, they can do by way of 367.
just say for each of these articles this provision will read thus.
examples, the word person in article 21 can
be interpreted to mean person accused of an offense.
in 367, i'll put an interpretation clause, which is person
in article 21 will mean person accused of an offense.
so all other rights that your lordships have read in into article
21 is out of the window because only person accused of an offense.
why? co-location. it's right next to article 20.
it's 21.
so it's similar kind of people, that's justification
they could give, if we allow this to happen.
'using 367, the phrase 'the legislatures of not less than
one half of the states', in the second proviso of
368, could be read as rajya sabha or the law minister.
' you could say that. we have followed the right procedure.
we have followed a procedure of doing it by way of 367.
you are giving all these ideas, mr sankaranarayanan.
which is why.which is why please take a sledgehammer to this.
this invidious method of trying to suborn the constitution.
and the reason why i say this, is because justice hidayatullah in madhav rao
scindia says - we must take extreme examples to test what they are doing.
only when you take extreme examples.
he talks about the maharaja of sindh and says, suppose
the maharaja of sindh is now said to be the maharaja.
said to be the nizam of hyderabad.
of course, the president would never do anything like that.
but we must take extreme examples for this purpose, which is
why i'm forced to take these extreme examples to show that
if they are allowed to do this, heaven knows what they'll do next.
now i won't read the next bullet point for many reasons.
your lordship should may read it on your own.
if your lordships come to page 17.
frauds on the constitution. ordinances, three judgments on that.
wadhwa, a k roy and krishna kumar singh, my lords, justice chandrachud's own judgment.
in fact, a k roy is the other mr. justice chandrachud's judgment.
we have put both those extracts there so your lordships can see.
in fact, both your lordships have spoken in very similar terms about
how the constituent assembly held forth, as it were, an assurance to
the people that an extraordinary power shall not be used in order
to perpetuate a fraud on the constitution, which is conceived with so
much faith and vision that assurance must, in all events be made good.
your lordships have said -'an edifice of rights and obligations cannot be
built in a constitutional order on acts which amount of fraud and power.
this will be destructive of the rule of law.
' similarly, in president's rule, how abuses are done.
s r bommai's paragraphs. rameshwar prasad. privy purse is.
i'll read separately in a few minutes.
possible consequences of such abuses.
if you see point 5 at page 19, there's a separate table
on this where we have substituted legislature of the state with parliament
everywhere in the constitution, so you can see how absurd it becomes.
because by using powers under 356, can you do things which are irreversible and destructive?
the idea of 356, much like 123, is a stopgap.
it's in between.
so that eventually parliament or the government will take a call on it.
it is not that you can do something completely irreversible
and say - sorry, i had the power to do it.
you didn't. votes on accounts, gst, procedure of legislatures, panchayats, municipalities.
even 246, where list 2 is with a state legislature.
parliament can say state legislature is parliament and then start making laws on its own.
surely that was not what is envisaged.
federalism in article 3 has been exhaustively covered by mr. c. u. singh.
i've just put some extracts of both the gnctd cases, particularly to show that
the gnctd 2 is one, that is, i think, very, very clear, the unique position.
and one small thing at point 2, page 22.
second point. 'twelve reorganization acts have been enacted .' we have given that list.
that's table 4. this is 2(b) my lords.
bottom of page 22.
' 12 reorganization acts enacted till date show that a state
has never been annulled.' the first one is this where by
way of this kashmir reorganization act, entry 15 has been deleted.
everything has been renumbered and moved up one.
it's never happened before.
all that's happened is union territories have moved into the state list.
that's all. you never had a situation where the converse has happened.
this is the first. my lords, mangal singh.
mr. singh referred to it.
mangal singh effectively said that states must have legislature, executive,
judiciary, etc. and all of these must be in existence.
by going ahead, not following the procedure with reference to the legislative council.
you've heard that point already. so i'm not referring to that again.
yes. mangal singh is reiterated in kesavananda bharati.
your lordship may see that. that mr. baig had pointed it out.
yes, and point 4 at pages 25, 26.
'the irreversible effect on states rights under the constitution. point c, d, e
and f, mr. naphade made. a, b, g and h is what we
are canvassing. i just want your lordships to chew on one point. if
this were permitted in an article 131 suit, which say, the state of
punjab files against the union of india, the union of india will impose
president's rule on punjab, be on the other side, withdraw the suit and disappear.
article 356. the manner of the exercise.
those s. r. bommai paras have been extracted my lords.
we have given an illustrative list, which is
now in my written submission, the original written submission.
i mentioned it here at page 28.
para 26 of the written submissions, which lists all the possible
misuses that are possible under this and one important point my lords.
what is permitted on the 356(1)(a) is only for the
functions of the government to be taken by the president.
functions. not powers.
now what is provided in 370 is not a
function, with the greatest of respect, it's a power.
356 didn't permit it. their proclamation under 356 is in the same terms.
it says functions.
so the only thing that could have been taken over was functions, not powers.
so this was a power, and they have taken
over what effectively is a power and they've utilized it.
i think this is an argument that they must meet.
they must explain how possibly this was a function.
a function under 356, which is temporal, is something which
is a day to day activity, which needs to be done.
it's not a discretion which has not been
exercised in 70 years, suddenly becoming a function.
i have pointed out how the irrevocable changes cannot be made.
and the last point, i've given your lordships, the details of the judgement,
the amendments, etc. dealing with pakistan, gilgit baltistan, as well as what they
call azad kashmir, and hopefully we will not tread down the same path.
my lords, i just want to conclude with
one last thing which i have set out.
page 16. this is vattel's law of nations.
it's a very, very old book.
i'm grateful to mr. rahul narayan, who lent it to me. it's in
fact, one of the oldest books on international law and laid down the principles.
george washington didn't return his copy to the local
library in philadelphia, and they discovered it 200 years later.
now, if i can just read two paragraphs
of this, it's set out at page 16.
i'll just read that because i think it's important for us to bear in mind.
para 30.
the constitution laws of a state are the basis of the public tranquillity, the
firmest support of political authority and the security for the liberty of the citizens.
but this constitution is a vain phantom, and the
best laws are useless if they may not religiously observe.
the nation ought then to watch very attentively in order to render them
equally respected by those who govern and by the people destined to obey.
to attack the constitution of the state and to
violate its laws is a capital crime against society.
please note this.
and if those guilty of it are invested with authority, they add to
this crime a perfidious abuse of the power with which they are entrusted.
the nation ought constantly to repress them with its utmost
vigour and vigilance as the importance of the case requires.
and then para 35.
but in treating here of the change of
the constitution, we treat only of the right.
the question of expediency belongs to politics.
we shall therefore only observe in general that great changes in a
state being delicate and dangerous operations, and frequent changes being in their
own a people ought to be very circumspect in this point, and
never be inclined to make innovations without the most pressing reasons or an absolute necessity.
the fickleness of the athenians was ever unamicable to the happiness
of the republic, and at length, proved fatal to that liberty
of which they were so jealous without knowing how to enjoy it.
my lords in madhavrao scindia i'll just give your lordships the paragraphs.
please read it at your own leisure.
and it's very, very important. justice shah speaking for seven judges.
mr. sankaranarayanan, you said that twice or thrice at your own leisure.
but have you left us any, after this comprehensive.
i'm so sorry. i don't want to take more time.
no, no, absolutely. <unclear> leisure for now, for the next couple of months.
i'm so sorry.
we must compliment you, and thank you and your juniors
as well, for putting this together because it's actually very, very.
was just telling brother justice sanjiv khanna, very, very.
<unclear> assisted me in the <unclear> i've put them
in the written submissions, but there have been more.
put it all together, so it makes our
task so much easier than to constantly cross reference.
grateful my lord. my lords, if your lordships can note.
justice shah.
this is at pdf, page 448 is where justice shah starts speaking for 7.
he's joined by justice hidayatullah earlier, and justice hegde later.
paras 94, 111. then justice hegde, who says it's fraudulent and for collateral reasons.
at 173 and 176. should i repeat those?
173? you have put it in the note?
no, that's not in the note. that's why.
i'm so sorry. just one second. come again then.
this is madhavrao right? yes. justice shah paras.
94 and 111. there's lots more. but i'm just giving what i think is most.
94 and 111. yes, justice hegde at 173 and 176.
paras 173 and 176 and justice hidayatullah at paras 42, 53 and para 73.
73 is where he says extreme examples are necessary to solve extreme cases.
my lords, i believe this is an extreme case,
mainly because of the way they have conducted themselves.
i'm most grateful for the patient hearing you have given.
thank you mr. sankaranarayanan. so just a little announcement.
one second. just a little announcement for next week.
for next week we will commence the.
of course we are sitting tomorrow.
friday will be miscellaneous, but next week onwards, to ensure that we
complete the hearings in continuity, we will be sitting on monday as well.
so the constitution bench will be assembling on monday in the next week.
just one thing. i made a small error in my oral arguments yesterday.
it doesn't change the argument.
i said the explanations would not apply in article
3 to jammu and kashmir because they were never extended.
but if your lordships were to uphold c.o 272 which came on
the 5th, then with that upholding those explanations, as well as the proviso.
the proviso which applies in the constitution of india, all
three would then apply, but it doesn't change my argument.
my argument was remains the same that unless both houses
made the recommendation, the bill would not be tabled at all.
so that argument remains because both the second house did it only on sixth.
just factually the explanations would apply. tomorrow we open with the.
how will we be opening tomorrow? we have division of labour my lord.
that we will indicate to your lordships.
some opening note and then we have divided our work on some respect.
so there'll be no overlap then between your.
tomorrow morning and basically on your side, it
will be the learned attorney general, the solicitor general.
first mr. salve, mr jethmalani, mr guru krishnakumar.
of course attorney you and the solicitor will complete first.
mr. nataraj and mr. vikram. but we have my lord a realistic time assessment.
and the attorney and the solicitor will argue the lead case
first, then after you both are done, who will argue thereafter?
mr. dwivedi, mr salve. alright. give it to us.
we just have the over here tomorrow.
by evening my lord. mr. sanjay.
between attorney and the solicitor broadly how long do you both anticipate you will take?
it's like i am supposed to give my opening summary of arguments and
then good part of the history and other things my learned solicitor will cover.
and then i'll come back and try to respond to the major legal submissions.
that's how we have divided our work.
so tomorrow in the opening, how long would you take about?
i will take about 10-15 in the opening.
fair enough then learned solicitor will take over
on the entire historical background and things like that.
then solicitor will cover the rest of it thereafter
on the legal point main summary ill come back and.
that's how three of us have divided.
and then mr. dwivedi what's is the.
mr. solicitor, how long would you take?
will you wrap up tomorrow or you'll be spilling over to.
it will spill over. alright. how much time on monday do you anticipate?
i think monday. all right.
so by monday evening, then the attorney and the solicitor between
the two of you, i think you can both be covered.
of course. these are not hard and.
hopefully my lord. i will ensure that nothing is repeated.
but some of the.
obviously by now you know that these are not
hard and fast, but we're just having a broad estimate.
none of us on this side have substantially bored your lordships.
your lordships would find some of the judgments name
familiar, but the relevant paras my lords were missed.
therefore, we may have to read it and only unavoidable repetition would be there.
otherwise, my lord we will ensure that there is no repetition.
any estimates. mr. dwivedi, how long you would take?
depends on what they cover but roughly.
it will get reduced.
i hope for 2 hours then if your lordships
are pleased to give me 90 minutes i will be.
has mr. salve indicated how long he would take?
my lords, he is saying.
he is saying one and a half days, without knowing about the earlier part.
my lord, i'll take one hour. i'll take one hour.
but i'll restrict myself depending on what all we cover.
mr. nataraj has said 45 minutes. mr. jethmalani.
mr. jethmalani said 90.
we are just sharing my lords, this is not the list prepared by us.
what's in list? time. this is the estimate mr. kanu agrawal received from various counsels.
since the whole case is opened so many times.
yes. ultimately, you are giving your propositions.
correct.
of course, as you say, perspective in a judgment or perspective
maybe in some fact scenarios, is what has to be done.
or some of the judgments not read or
not fully read, etc. for instance, i have.
personally speaking i think. it's a little overestimate i find of time.
we are in your lordships' hands. my lord we ensure.
once the first two arguments are concluded then
perhaps rest would know how much to take.
yes. yes. we'll use that discretion. all of us would use that discretion.
would you. given from this overestimate of time, as if he is arguing .
this is my perspective of it.
<unclear> ist is indian stretchable time, but we will keep it as indian standard time.
the chief is far more patient. obliged, my lords.
