so just for the information of all the members
of the bar, you'll see that a screen is there.
so we are just trying to explore with the possibility of live transcription of arguments.
that's wonderful.
we had to do it in a live environment with an experiment so
we'll just see how it works, at least in the constitution bench matters.
because then we'll have a permanent record of arguments.
of course it helps the judges and the
lawyers, but it will also help our law colleges.
they can analyse you know how matters are argued, what was submitted.
it is a huge resource.
we'll also get to know nabam rebia was argued my lord.
no i say this in a lighter way, only in a lighter vein.
we are already there.
you know why we are telling, honourable chief
justice is telling is - don't interrupt each other.
otherwise that will be difficult. argue one by one.
one at a time.
my lords, in posterity we will get to
know what foolish arguments we've made my lords.
nobody admits. but we'll of course, this will be a great record for the.
no, no, i think it is a wonderful idea.
truly a court of record.because every word is recorded.
it should be, it should be. every word is recorded.
my lords in fact, i can share something with you.
when i was of practicing in new york, we
had these ebt proceedings, that is examination before trial.
and i'm talking about this, about the 70s.
my lord they would record everything that was said in the course of that
examination even then, so that we know, lawyers knew what was going to happen.
gujarat has e-courts my lord in the sessions division, sessions court.
there even our internal whisperings are also recorded.
that is very dangerous. that is hazardous, completely hazardous.
now the only thing is that if there are two or more
voices at the same time, that causes little bit of a problem.
but they obviously have personnel who will clean up the errors by the evening.
they suggested that during the course of the day the counsel will get the link.
so the counsel can look at it.
by the evening they would have cleared up the.
cleaned up the entire transcript and given it to us.
that's wonderful. that's wonderful. that's truly, truly a milestone, i would say my lords.
a milestone my lords. in vc proceedings, anybody wanted to interrupt, would lift their finger.
so much there is no cross talk.
so we can follow that so that it won't overlap with one another.
hopefully.
so my lords, let me just give your lordships a birds eye view of
what is in issue here, then i'll go on to the matter in some detail.
my lords as your lordship knows my lords, what is in
issue is whether the legislative party, that's the central issue, whether
the legislative party in the house acts independently of the political party.
that's the central issue.
because i will, my lords, while i go through the facts before your lordships,
indicate to your lordships that on the 21st of june when the first meeting
took place, and we called the group led by uddhav thackeray, called members of
the legislative party who belonged to now the eknath shinde group to come and
attend the meeting, which was not done, pursuant
to which, my lords, some actions were taken.
the contention throughout has been that there is a split in the party.
so the issue before your lordships is - can members of the legislature within
the house or comprising of those members of the house by themselves say that
there is a split in the party because they don't agree with the leadership?
this in turn would require your lordships to look at the tenth schedule
and in that context interpret the role of the party within the legislature.
my lords, after all, members of the legislature of any
particular party come, get elected on a symbol of the party.
they are there because of the party.
and if they are there because of the party my
lords, they are, there is an umbilical cord link between
them while they are sitting in the house and the party outside.
can that link be severed and say we are an
independent set of people, we can do what we like.
that will require my lords the interpretation of the tenth schedule.
require your lordships to analyse the role of the whip, how a whip gets
appointed, how he happens to be a bridge between the legislative party and the
political party and that nothing happens in the
house without the political party taking a decision.
nothing happens. my lords the bill is introduced by the treasury benches, any bill.
is it your contention therefore.
is it your contention mr. sibal, therefore that, unless there
is a split outside the house, within the political party,
that split cannot find recognition within the legislative party within the house?
absolutely. that's my contention.
that is the law also my lords and i will demonstrate that to your lordships.
that is the law.
now what happens, i am giving your lordships an example my lords,
a bill is introduced by the treasury benches, a controversial bill let's assume.
bill in which there is no consensus.
my lords what happens?
the parliamentary party, a group of members of the legislature are
invited by the parliamentary party to sit outside the house in
a particular room and say, this is the bill that's being introduced.
what is, what should be our position?
the party decides the position and it is articulated in the house.
the legislative party by itself dehors the party doesn't decide what
we are going to do, what we are not going to do.
when a whip is going to be issued, my lords,
it is issued outside the house and translated inside the house.
on this, you are going to vote against the bill that has been
introduced or that you will vote in favour or that you will abstain.
but when the tenth schedule speaks about, say, a merger, for instance, now, there
are very few exceptions in the tenth schedule, and it speaks of a merger.
ultimately the speaker has to decide whether there is a merger.
the speaker will not go into whether there was a merger outside the house.
because then the speaker will be taking over
the function of the election commission of india.
that my lords, that argument is entirely on a different plane.
we are not dealing with it and we
will interpret the paragraph 4 for your lordships also.
the speaker's remit cannot lie outside the house.
my lords, there's a problem.
supposing, alright, let us analyze that for a
minute since your lordships have raised the issue.
supposing there are ten members of the legislative party in the house.
right?
and the merger has to take place of the
political party, they belong say to the samajwadi party.
right my lords?
now, even paragraph 4 says there is a merger of
a political party, not the merger of the legislative party.
right? so therefore samajwadi party.
but no, if we accept your argument that would mean that unless the
election commission of india decides on a merger outside the house, the speaker
cannot take a decision within the house whether there is a merger or not.
that can't be. no, no. election commission need not decide this issue my lords.
how else?
because a resolution will be passed that we have merged and that will be informed.
the election commission, they all have taken a decision.
they'll be informed.
the majority of the members of the party will decide, they will be informed.
once merger takes place, these eight people, these eight
people may say - we don't want to merge.
and paragraph 4 says they need not merge.
but my lords, i'll come to that later.
it is a very complex issue. not so.
let's have a broad now framework of the facts because.
i will, i will my lords.
in fact, that was our basic problem that
unless we have a clear perception on the facts.
i am going to do that.
.it is very difficult for us then to
look at the law dehors from the fact.
i entirely agree but, may i just my lord
what are the issues that are going to be.
i just want your lordships to.
we have to necessarily reframe the issues because the
kind of the issues which are there which are.
yeah, yeah. it's not reflective of what needs to be decided.
i agree entirely.
my lord the other issue is, the other issue
is and that's never come up before the court.
and that issue is, can a governor, swear in a member of
a legislative party against whom a disqualification matter is pending before the house?
that is the other issue. never come up before.
what then are the powers of the governor in matters in relation to disqualification?
this is not a case of a pre-poll alliance, this is not a
case of post-poll alliance, this is not a case of one political party.
it is a case of people who allege that they
are the party because they are a majority in the legislature.
right my lords?
what then are the powers, or what should be the function of
the governor in matters of this nature, and how he should conduct himself?
because he also knows, because the disqualification petition is pending, my lords.
he also knows.
and if the governor does, my lords, swear him in as a chief
minister, my lords, he actually topples, topples a democratically elected government and aides
in doing that because they happen to be a majority in the legislature.
my lords, that's one of the issues that your lordships may have to consider.
then the other issue to be considered is, can a court, a constitutional court
without referring the matter to the speaker in the facts and circumstances of this
case, decide the matter on it's own, given
the fact that there are no disputed facts.
we are not going to my lords place before your lordships, any disputed fact.
all are matters of record. your question is, can a constitutional court decide tenth schedule?
yeah, that is correct. tenth schedule? that's correct.
that's correct. because under the tenth schedule, it has the speaker to decide.
correct my lords?
but if the proceedings my lords are imbued with illegality,
and given the conduct of speakers in the past, what
then should be the attitude of the court in a given matter?
that's the other thing.
and then of course, lastly, my lords, how do you
deal with an issue, and that my lords because the
last question in the reference is the powers of the election commission.
and your lordships, and that's the last question, which is the last issue
your lordships will have to decide, that under paragraph 15 of the symbols'
order, when there is a split in the political party, it starts with
that proposition, that two factions have arisen pursuant to a split in the political party.
then which factions should get the symbol?
will that arise in this case? i am sorry?
will that arise here? yes, yes, that's the question.
that's the question. what is the role of the election commission in matters under the.
that's part of the reference.
so under para 15 of the symbols' order, when two factions emerge in pursuance
of a split, so what is the sequitur and how would you end the sentence?
my lords, then what is the role of the election commission in deciding that matter?
should it await the decision of the constitutional court?
should it go ahead?
your lordships only, as your lordships will remember, in september said - no
stay, but your lordship did not say how he is going to decide it.
but that mr. sibal is your independent challenge to the order of the election commission.
we can't . that's separate issue my lord.
we can't really decide that. no, no, that's a part of the reference.
i am going to argue my lords.
and can we, how do we. my lord, if constitutionally, the election commission cannot proceed.
the split would have, have to happen on 21st of june.
there was no whisper of a split on 21st of june.
so your contention that therefore a election commission itself cannot proceed.
yes. .unless the speaker has decided that.
correct, correct. that's what your lordship said - no stay, fine, no stay.
we went before the election commission and said you cannot decide on this matter.
the matter is pending in supreme court.
he said no, but supreme court has said no stay and
you will find that tomorrow when, your lordships sit at 3:30.
but, be that as it may these are the my lords, that's
the last question that your lordships, your ladyship will have to look at.
so these broadly my lords, are the issues that you might
be asked upon to decide, that you might wish to decide.
now, my lords let's go to the list of dates
because unless you have the facts my lords, it will be.
my lords this is now pdf page 108 of the written submissions <unclear> it is
marked as capital a. and i have learnt how to use the ipad. mr. sibal,
just wondering if you could just look at the issues that were framed. ladyship, i
can't hear you. look at the issues that were framed once, so that we know
the perspective in which you are arguing? the issues that were framed for reference to
the constitution. i can read those. can we just do a quick recall before we.
yeah, i think that's a good idea. yes reference order, your lordships will have that.
order compilation my lords? pdf page 28. and the questions start at page 30. which
is the order dated? it is an order dated, 23rd of august 2022, page 28
my lords and the relevant part.question starts at page 30 at the bottom. pdf page
30 my lords. the ladyship has it? justice shah my lords? yes. may i my
lords? (a), whether notice for removal of a speaker restricts him from continuing with disqualification
proceedings under the tenth schedule of the constitution, as held by this court in nabia?
i have already argued that.
your lordships had deferred your lordship's judgment on
that, so we'll skip that for the moment.
(b), whether a petition under article 226 or 32, lies inviting a decision on a
disqualification petition by the high court or the supreme court, as the case may be?
that's the question that i have already formulated in different.
the language is somewhat different, but the intent is the same.
then (c), can a court hold that a member is deemed to be
disqualified by virtue of his or her actions absent a decision to the speaker.
actually (b) and (c) are together my lords.
they are interlinked. per se cases? yes.
language is somewhat my lords.
(d), what is the status of proceedings in the
house during the pendency of disqualification petitions against the members?
my lords it really does not clarify what it means.
what is the status of proceedings?
what it means is, that can members against whom there is a disqualification
petition pending, have a role to play in the house while it is pending?
otherwise you can topple any government you want.
then (e) my lords, if the decision of a speaker that
a member has incurred disqualification under the tenth schedule, relates back
to the date of the action complained of, then what is
the status of proceedings that took place during the pendency of a disqualification petition?
now my lords this question only arises if you allow proceedings to go on.
if you don't decide on the disqualification before, then this question arises because if
at a later point in time, you consider them to be disqualified relating back
to the date when their act led to a voluntary giving up membership of
the party or violation of the whip, then
my lords what happens to the intervening proceedings?
a government has been formed, actions have been taken, policy decisions have been made.
would it not be better for the purposes of, i personally
believe, democratic traditions that you should await your hands till the
disqualification is decided first because this problem will not arise then.
then my lords (f), i think it's very, very important.
what is the impact of the removal of paragraph 3 in the tenth schedule?
according to me that is central to the
entire issue because now you don't have a split.
the issue of a split doesn't arise.
which is why if you want to go to the
election commission there has to be a split in the party.
not a split in the legislature. that is not on record, no such split.
so this is central and we will interpret
paragraph 4, also in that context my lords.
then (g), what is the scope of the power of the speaker
to determine the whip and the leader of the house legislative party?
what is the interplay of the same with
respect to the provisions of the tenth schedule?
my lords, actually again convoluted in its expression.
in simple terms it means, that how is a whip
appointed and how is a leader in the house appointed?
is there a role of a political party,
or is it something that the legislative party decides?
can majority of the legislative party decide, i'll change the whip tomorrow?
can't be. so what has happened in this case?
and i'll come to the facts that sitting outside the house, x number of people
said you are no longer the whip and those are members of the legislature only.
i can give your lordships documents to the effect.
what happens is when a leader of the house is appointed,
the letter that is given to the speaker is that the
party hereby decides that this person will lead the house for the party.
it is not the, members of the legislature don't decide these issues.
similarly whip, because the whip is the bridge between the government, between government
or the opposition, whichever party it is and the house, members of the legislature.
that's why your lordships will see that nowhere in the constitution
does the word political party is referred to except in the
tenth schedule, because in the constitution you are dealing with institutions.
you're dealing with an institutional framework within which all political parties function.
in the tenth schedule you are dealing with framework within which a
legislative party functions in the context of the political party resulting in disqualification.
then my lords (h) - are intra-party decisions amenable to judicial review?
i don't think that question arises. there is no intra-party decisions in the legislature.
your ladyship is right. we need to look at some of these questions.
then (i) - what is the extent of discretion and
power of the governor to invite a person to form
the government and whether the same is amenable to judicial review?
my lords, governor's actions are always amenable to judicial review.
that's not an issue at all.
question is, what should a governor do in the context of
disqualification petitions pending, and which are yet to be adjudicated upon?
as a governor, my lords, who represents a. he is a
constitutional authority, he needs to protect the constitution and the laws.
in this very state, a governor my lords, in the early hours of the
morning gave an oath through the oath of office, made somebody a chief minister.
and by the early morning, during, on daylight, he had to resign.
governors, and i say this with respect to all the institution of the
governor, that governors have, in my respectful submissions acted far beyond their constitutional
responsibilities, as we have seen, as i have seen in the recent past.
that may not be a proposition that the other side will accept.
but i'm giving only my view of the matter.
it is unfortunate that governments are actively involved in the politics of the country.
then my lords, the last one.
what is the scope or the powers of the election commission
of india, with respect to determination of a split within a party?
that's where my lords the question of para 15 of the symbol's order comes in.
my lords, kindly now, come up, come to the written submissions
of the petitioner and the list of dates is at page 108.
pdf 108. that is 'a' right? a - petitioner written submission.
yes, a. pdf 108. written submission no?
you are referring to written submissions? yes, yes.
not additional written submissions. a. my lords.
a. page 108. pdf.
mr. sibal what we could also do is, that
of course, you see the broad points of reference.
and ultimately we'll need to focus narrow down the reference to the
issues which you want to focus on and maybe if you could
during the course of the afternoon share that with the other side.
we can have their feedback so that if
we narrow it down to certain specific issues.
because many of the issues which have been framed
in the reference order the may not strictly arise.
yeah it is not necessary.
so let's sort of structure that so that it lends some clarity to.
let us do that in the evening, my lords.
that'll be much easier for us if your lordship will allow us, because
i'll consult my colleagues on the other side, who will give some agreed issues.
because after noon may not be the most appropriate.
evening? evening would be fine. yes. we will.
and also then we can have some idea about, you know, the time schedule.
how long would you take so that then we
can restrict them as well, and to certain time.
well, this side my lord will take 3 days.
3? mr. sibal, how long would you take about 3 hours or so today?
no, no. because i'll take much more tomorrow too.
mr. sibal, we will have to have structured arguments.
all right. it'll be structured my lords.
i'm not going to repeat myself at all.
your lordship knows i have myself, my lords reduced.
i mean. after mr. sibal, after you conclude dr. singhvi will.?
dr. singhvi and then mr. kamat my lords.
my colleague mr. kamat. so why don't.
maybe we could do this.
we have about an hour and 15 minutes before
lunch and you get 2 hours after lunch today.
that's about 3 hours and 15 minutes.
so maybe if you could conclude today by 04:00, then we can
give dr. singhvi until lunch tomorrow and then a little supplement half
an hour after lunch for mr. kamat and then they can start tomorrow afternoon.
we are breaking at 3:30 tomorrow so they get about an hour and a
half in the afternoon and maybe on thursday they can conclude by maybe lunch.
and then we will give you. we'll try that my lords.
we'll try that. no issue my lords, we certainly try and speed it up.
i mean, i just think my lords, your lordships may have questions yourselves.
of course.
if we find that of course there's a little
change in the time schedule we can certainly do that.
then your lordships will also have to decide on the nabam reference at some
stage what your lordships want to do because that sort of opens up another.
so we'll look at the list of dates?
yes.
so on 19-6-1966 shiv sena founded by balasaheb thackeray to espouse the ideology and legacy
of whatever and has been recognized as the state political party by the election commission.
balasaheb thackeray was the president shiv sena pramukh of the shiv sena from its
very inception and continued in the role till his demise on 17th november 2012.
after the demise of balasaheb thackeray, uddhav thackeray was unanimously
elected to be president, shiv sena, paksh pramukh of the
shiv sena political party and has continued to hold the position.
at present shri uddhav thackeray unequivocally continues to be the paksh pramukh of the
shiv sena, the president of shiv sena, which is the highest position as provided
in the constitution of shiv sena, and a copy of the constitution is annexed.
85 - in view of the repeated defections of elected mlas and
mps and with a view to curb horse trading of an elected
representative, the constitution was amended to include the tenth schedule by virtue
of the 52nd amendment to the constitution with the following statements and objects.
the evil of political defections has been a matter of national concern.
if it is not combatted, it is likely to undermine the
very foundation of our democracy and the principles which sustain it.
with this object an assurance was given in the address by the president of
parliament that the government intended to introduce the current session of parliament an anti-defection bill.
this bill is meant for outlawing detection and fulfilling the above assurance.
so nothing in the tenth schedule should be interpreted to give credence to a defection.
nothing in the tenth schedule should be interpreted to somehow legalize
a defection, give credibility to that process because the whole object
of the act is to ensure that there are no unprincipled defections.
my lords, there is an elected government.
the attempt of the court and of the institution of the
governor should be to allow the elected government to function till
such time as a person is either disqualified or not disqualified.
right? and if there is a disqualification petition that should be allowed to be decided.
because if you don't allow that to happen and you pass an order like you
did on the 27th of june, unfortunately, it's the judicial order that led to this.
it is that judicial order that led to this.
had that not been passed, we wouldn't be here and that if the speaker
had been allowed to decide and they would have gone up in appeal if
there was a decision against them, or somebody else would have gone up in appeal.
so my lords, 7th april the tenth schedule was amended by the 92nd amendment and
paragraph 3 thereof, which permitted one-third members of the legislative party to split, was omitted.
split is no longer available as a defense against disqualification under the tenth schedule.
my lords please mark that.
the defenses available were only two that i have one-third of the
legislative party as split pursuant to a split in the political party.
it is not a split of the legislative party.
paragraph 3 and i will read that your lordships.
it is a split in the political party resulting in one-third of the members in
the legislative party, which gives them a defense to say that they cannot be disqualified.
similarly with paragraph 4, it's a defense.
if i am two-thirds and there's a merger of a party,
it's a defense saying, now i am entitled to be that party.
that is part of the new party.
either the original a new original party or the part of the merged party.
that's a defense.
that's why i indicated to your lordships, now there's no question
of majority, minority, one-third, two-thirds, not relevant, if there's a split.
because what the purpose of the defection law
is to ensure that there is no un-principled defection.
then my lords, 23rd january organizational elections of the shiv sena political party
for the term 2018- 23 were held, wherein uddhav thackeray was elected as president.
the results for duly communicated in the prescribed format
to the election commission on 27th of february 2018.
my lords, the election commission and that is not relevant here
-- election commission, in its order, says, i don't have your constitution.
therefore, i will not consider that you are above the organizational wing structure.
i will not consider at all.
so i go only by what is the legislative majority and
the legislative majority is 38 people from the eknath shinde group.
therefore they get the symbol. anyway that's, that's another matter.
then my lords october 2019, elections in the 40th legislative assembly of maharashtra were held.
the seat distribution of the said election inter se of political parties is following.
your lordship knows this. you have seen it before.
then my lords, november 2019, a post-poll alliance was formed between the
shiv sena, the ncp, as well as the inc called maha vikas
aghadi to form a stable government in the state of maharashtra with
the president of shiv sena, uddhav thackeray being sworn in as the chief minister.
23-11-2019 prior to the swearing in of thackeray, the governor hastily swore
in devendra fadnavis early in the morning as a chief minister of maharashtra.
this honourable court in shiv sena vs. union of india directed an immediate
floor test and the devendra fadnavis resigned before facing the floor of the house.
this only indicates how governors have been conducting themselves.
how can a governor have sworn in somebody as a chief minister
without knowing that he has majority in the early hours of the morning?
this order is on 23rd november? yes.
supreme court's order? yes. oh the order?
i'll just.2019 10 scc 809. tell me later.
then my lords, it's mentioned there. anyway.
april may 2020 governor has been at loggerheads with the.
25-11? oh 25-11, sunil prabhu. now this is important.
25-11 sunil prabhu was appointed as chief whip of the shiv sena legislative
party with the blessings of uddhav thackeray, president of the shiv sena political
party and the same was duly notified to the speaker of the maharashtra legislative assembly.
my lords, that actually, if your lordships don't mind, look at that document.
or do you want to read the dates and then later.
we will read the entire dates. alright, alright.
then april may 2020 the honourable governor has been at loggerheads
with the mva government and is almost created a political crisis.
governor was sitting on to the shri uddhav thackeray's recommendation
for nomination to the maharashtra legislative assembly despite a period
of six months as an unelected members about to expire on 27-05-2020.
further the governor had blocked holding of the speaker's election.
no speaker's election took place. my lords he was not a member .
there was a seat my lords for the legislative council, which had to be.
he had to be elected from that seat.
he wouldn't hold the election for almost six months.
this tells you my lords, how constitutional authorities are acting.
first you swear in somebody, he resigns the
next morning, then you have you have this problem.
the bjp has been attempting to create divisions within the shiv sena 20th june 2020.
in the recently conducted mlc election wherein despite having the requisite number of mlas on
its side, the mva alliance, led by shiv sena lost the seat to the bjp.
this was because of cross voting within the mva and
particularly within the shiv sena at the behest of the bjp.
my lords, i'm not going to rely on
these facts, my lords because this is disputed.
so that these facts i'm not going to rely on.
it was widely reported in the media that eknath shinde, who was then the
cabinet minister of urban development and public works, has along with certain other delinquent
mlas of the shiv sena gone into hiding
in the bjp ruled neighbouring state of gujarat.
then 21 - 6 my lords. these are the undisputed facts that now start.
to contain and allay, the apprehensions that were arising in the
party post the mlc elections, an urgent meeting of the shiv
sena a legislative party was called on the 21st of june.
eknath shinde along with certain other delinquent mlas, did
not attend the above mentioned meeting dated 21st of june.
the party resolved in the said meeting to remove eknath shinde from the position
of the leader of the shiv sena legislative party and appoint ajay chaudhary instead.
now this is interesting because this is a
matter which your lordships have to constitutionally considered.
so, a faction, which is a legislative party, decides that i will change the whip.
constitutionally impermissible.
then my lords, the decision, then eknath shinde, along
with certain other delinquent mlas did not attend the meeting.
party resolved in the said meeting to remove eknath shinde from the position of
the leader of the shiv sena legislative party and appoint shri ajay chaudhary instead.
the decision to remove eknath shinde was communicated
by uddhav thackeray to the honourable deputy speaker.
after due verification, the deputy speaker accepted the
change of leadership of shiv sena in the house.
the reason why this happened was my lords because as
your lordship knows, he had to be a member of
the legislative council because there was no seat in the assembly.
so, the then chief minister became a member of the legislative council.
therefore my lords, in the meantime, somebody had to be appointed
as a leader of the house because they were the treasury benches.
so eknath shinde was the leader of the house and he was
removed from his position of leadership by a decision of the party
and the deputy speaker was told about it and he accepted it.
in the larger interest of the party, it was thought fit
to call for another legislative party meeting to give one more
opportunity to the mlas who were absent in the meeting on
21st june to show their loyalty and support to the original political party.
hence another meeting of the sslp was called.
individual notices were issued to all the mlas of the shiv sena and it
was made adequately clear that failure to participate in the meeting without providing valid
and adequate reasons in writing, communicated in advance to the undersigned will result in
consequential action against you under the relevant provisions of the constitution so we were.
they were told.
on 22nd june, despite the importance of the meeting called on
22nd of june aimed at consolidating the sslp's strength to contain
any possible horse trading, several dissident mlas did not attend the meeting.
instead, the delinquent mlas sitting in bjp ruled states sent communications rejecting
the holding of the meeting as illegal, which itself shows that those
mlas had been working contrary to the dictate of the original political party.
22nd june: sunil prabhu in the capacity of chief whip responded to the
communication dated 22nd of june of the delinquent mlas rejecting the reasons given
for their absence from the sslp meeting as an afterthought, frivolous, backdated and
proof of them acting contrary to the interests of the original political party.
that's the notice that your lordships has read, 21st of june, dated 21st june.
i mean, received on 22nd june at 11:30 a.m., but dated 21st june.
eknath shinde wrote to the deputy speaker communicating his appointment as leader.
so now my lords the legislative party or a majority
of the legislative party can decide who is going to
be the leader to the party in the house, of the party.
sitting in assam.
22nd of june, simultaneously a purported notice for the removal of deputy
speaker narhari zirwal under rule 11 under maharashtra assembly rules read with
179, was received at a legislature secretariat, expressing no confidence in the deputy speaker.
notice was hand delivered by an unknown courier, and not by any mla.
it is also relevant to note that none of the purported signatories
of the notice had personally delivered any such notice, nor it has.
it was sent through the registered email address of any of them.
the shiv sena legislative party in its meeting took note of shri
eknath shinde and the rebel mlas and the fact that they had
indulged in antiparty activities and were trying to destabilize the mva government.
in view of this it was resolved that the shiv sena
legislative party meeting at the then cms residence that necessary legal
action shall be taken under the tenth schedule against the errant mlas.
now who is cm? cm my lords is a member of the legislative council.
he is also the param pramukh, paksh pramukh.
so he is the political leader. he is the one who decides.
23rd of june, this sunil prabhu filed disqualification petitions under para 2 (1)
(a) seeking disqualification of eknath shinde, and 15 other delinquent mlas of shiv sena.
24th of june, it was widely published in the news report that the
rebel mlas is led by eknath shinde were acting in a collusion with
bjp and their entire logistical arrangement in guwahati was made by the bjp leaders.
24th of june, secretary of maharashtra legislative assembly received an email from an
advocate named vishal acharya attaching notice for removal of the speaker dated 21st june.
on the same day, the secretary of the assembly communicated the
decision of the deputy speaker to the email of vishal acharya,
refusing to take on record the communication dated 22nd of june
until the genuineness and veracity of any such communication and its signatories was ascertained.
25th of june, one of the dissident mlas deepak kesarkar, in a live interview, declared
that the dissident mlas had formed a new group and named it shiv sena balasaheb.
and it also announced that they will have a separate
leader whip, office and everything else, just like a party has.
25th of june, honourable speaker, after due verification, was pleased to issue notices
to the delinquent mlas under rule 6 of the maharashtra legislative assembly disqualification
on ground of defection rules 86 read with the tenth schedule of the
constitution asking the delinquent mlas to file their
replies by 5:30 on the 27th june 2022.
on 25th of june the national executive meeting of the shiv sena was held.
the said meeting was attended by over 163 representatives of the
national executive and the leadership of uddhav thackeray as the president
of shiv sena was unanimously and equivocally accepted by the national executive.
25th of june, sunil prabhu filed an additional affidavit that the disqualification proceedings inter alia
containing the media reports that showed the hobnobbing of the delinquent mlas with bjp leaders.
25th of june, sunil prabhu file disqualification petitions against two
independent mlas and one mla belonging to the prahar janshakti party.
the petition against the independent mlas were filed on the ground that they gave
up their independent status by taking part in the resolution dated 21st of june
passed by the rebel mlas and signing the said resolution on the letterhead of sslp.
also the ground taken against bjp mla was that the said mla voluntarily
gave up membership of his original political party by taking part in the
said resolution, dated 21st june, and by signing the same on the sslp letterhead.
27th june, issuance of the notice of 25th june, by the
honourable deputy speaker came to be challenged by the 16 mlas,
including sri eknath shinde who filed a writ petition under 32.
the said court, the honourable court by the interim order dated so and so
in writ petition so and so was pleased to in the interim direct this.
thus, meanwhile, as an interim measure, the time granted by the deputy speaker of the
assembly to the petitioners or the other similarly placed members of the legislative party to
submit their written submissions up to today on, today 05:30 p.m. is extended till 12.07.
my lord, just kindly note the language here - as an interim measure.
they have not filed a reply till date.
we are now in february 2023. they've not filed a reply.
now my lords, prior to this, prior to the passing of
this judicial order my lords, all that happened was happening outside
of bombay, outside of maharashtra, in a state in the northeast and by.
by whom? by these legislative. members of the legislative assembly, that's all.
there was no party in sight. there was no meeting of any party.
there was. nobody called for a meeting of the party.
and these are undisputed facts my lords.
these are not disputed facts. .
can the tenth schedule countenance a situation, where because of whatever
reasons, my lords, we don't want to go into it, a
majority or even a minority of mlas are just, my lords, they.
let's forget the majority, supposing a minority.
we don't sometimes need the majority to topple the government.
we only need a minority.
supposing it's a minority my lords and the minority
outside the state of maharashtra says i have formed.
i am the political party.
and then a judicial order is passed on a disqualification petition, that - no,
no, no if a petition is filed, you can file your reply after 10-15 days.
in the meantime, the minority gets in touch with the other party topples the government.
a new chief minister is appointed.
can you ever imagine that the tenth schedule would allow that?
can it ever be countenanced my lord?
this is harakiri. this is legislative harakiri.
political harakiri.
and you can't interpret the tenth schedule my lords in
this particular fashion to allow an elected government to fall.
that's why i said it is judicial orders of this court that resulted in this.
then my lords 27th of june, as several other
members of the sslp had also openly indulged anti-party activity.
now can anybody say, my lords, that this is not
anti-party or this is not giving up membership of the party.
one of you, one of you sitting there say that we are forming a
new party called shiv sena balasaheb and you are sitting in a state ruled
by the opposite, ruled by a party my lords, which was in the opposition.
first you go to gujarat, then you go to assam.
there are no dispute on that.
these actions per se amount to giving up membership of the party, apart
from the fact that you don't attend the meeting on 21st-22nd of june.
so what is the speaker going to decide?
what can he decide given these facts?
then 28th of june, my lords, late in the evening the
leader of opposition in the state of maharashtra, devendra fadnavis went
to meet the governor and requested him to hold a floor test.
after the stay. that is where the role of the governor comes in.
on 28th of june, immediately after meeting the devendra fadnavis, and with utmost haste,
the governor sent a communication dated 28th of june though received in the early
hours of 29th of june to the then chief minister directing him to face
a floor test in the house on the very next day, 30th of june.
it is relevant to note that the honourable governor did not even attempt
to ascertain from the chief minister, whether they enjoyed the majority of the house.
on 28th of june, the governor by way of a separate communication dated 28th
of june, which was received in the early hours directed the latter to forthwith.
it directed the latter to forthwith on 30th june
to convene an assembly and hold a floor test.
29th of june, sunil prabhu filed a writ
petition before this honourable court seeking a stay.
so my lords, we said please stay the matter.
please don't allow this to happen.
of the directions of the floor test in view of the fact
that the disqualification petition of 42 mlas under the tenth schedule were
pending, by order dated 29th june in writ petition so and so.
this court was pleased to direct as follows.
having given our thoughtful consideration to the rival submissions, we do not find
any ground to stay convening of the special session of the maharashtra assembly.
how?
vidhan sabha on 30th june, tomorrow at 11:00 am
and with the only agenda of a trust vote.
so therefore you give legitimacy to those against whom disqualification petitions are
pending, and such legitimacy that they are able to topple the government
by colluding with another party which is an opposition in that very state.
that's the effect of the judicial order.
so first stay the proceeding before the deputy speaker, then allow another this collusion.
and get an elected government toppled.
what used to be my lords the misuse of 357
has now been substituted by the misuse of the tenth schedule.
356 is now misuse of the tenth schedule.
and this.
the proceedings in the trust vote to be convened on 30th of
june, shall be subject to the final outcome of the instant petition.
that's another interesting thing my lords, proceedings of the trust
vote shall be subject to the final outcome of the
instant writ petition, as well as the writ petitions referred to above.
so therefore my lords every action of the governor resulting in a new
government having been formed is subject to your lordships' decision in these petitions.
so you cannot give it the colour and clothe it with
legality because the judicial order itself says that it's subject to.
so you cannot say now the trust vote has happened.
now a chief minister has been installed.
now a government is in place. now you can't do a thing about it.
the special session of maharashtra vidhan sabha shall be conducted in accordance to the
directions that contained in the communication dated through 28th june of the governor of maharashtra.
then on 29th june, chief minister uddhav thackeray resigned.
he knows the writing was on the wall.
have been given legitimacy to those who.
then 30th of june at around 3 p.m. eknath shinde and
devendra fadnavis met the governor and staked claim to form the government.
this is also anti-party activity. no evidence is required on this.
then 30th of june, the governor, without taking into account the
fact that the membership of eknath shinde itself was in dispute.
here again, the question of the governor comes in my lords, in dispute
in the imminent disqualification petition pending against him swore shri eknath shinde in
as the chief minister and devendra fadnavis as the deputy chief minister of maharashtra.
the honourable governor, thereafter, directed eknath shinde to
prove his majority on the floor of the house.
we knew that he, everybody knows that he would have the majority in the house.
you can fool the constitution, but not the arithmetic.
then the governor without taking into account the
fact that the members and i had read that.
then 30th june due to their antiparty activities which unquestionably amounted to relinquishing
membership of the shiv sena political party, shri shinde, tanaji savant, uday samant
and gulabrao patil were removed from their positions in the organizational set up
of the party by the undisputed president of the shiv sena shri uddhav thackeray .
my lords, let's just note here, no meeting of any political party took place
at the instance of eknath shinde and you will see that tomorrow in the
in the petition before the election commission that alleged meeting, alleged meeting, which i
will show is bogus, happen to have taken
place on 18th july after all this was over.
and the petition for getting the symbol was filed
on the 19th july, on the very next day.
then my lords, 1st of july 2022 shiv sena secretary sent a letter to
the election commission intimating the authority regarding the removal of eknath shinde from the
positions of shiv sena and change in the organizational setup of shiv sena there to.
also by the separate letter, the shiv sena secretary intimated the eci regarding the
removal of tanaji sawant and uday samant from the organizational position of shiv sena.
similarly shiv sena secretary sent another letter to the election commission of india intimating
the authority regarding the removal of gulabrao patil from the organizational position of shiv sena.
on 1st of july an applicant for directions in ia such
an such was filed by sunil prabhu in the present writ
petition seeking an interim order suspending the delinquent mlas against whom
disqualification petitions have been filed till the final adjudication of the tenth schedule proceedings.
the said application was mentioned before this court for urgent
interim hearing listing wherein this honourable was directed to list
the application along with the writ petition on 11th of july.
then 2nd of july, the principal secretary maharashtra legislative party assembly circulated working
order for conducting elections to the office of speaker on 3rd of july.
the said agenda showed that the name of rahul narvekar was proposed by the
bjp mla and the name of ranjan prabhakar salvi was proposed by shiv sena.
this rahul narvekar was proposed by a bjp mla
because he happened to be member of the bjp.
then 2nd july sunil prabhu acting as chief whip issues a whip.
now till that day sunil prabhu is still the whip.
acting as chief whip of sslp issued whip to the members of sslp regarding
the election of the speaker scheduled on 3rd july, all the party members were
asked to remain present in the assembly and
vote for the shiv sena candidate rajan salvi.
sunil prabhu issued a further whip to the members
of sslp regarding confidence motion scheduled on 4th of july.
all the party members were asked to remain present is the assembly
and till the end of the session and vote against the confidence motion.
my lords, your lordships, just keep one thing in mind, it's not their case
that they merged with any party, it's their case that they belong to the
shiv sena so if they belong to the shiv sena, then how can they
disobey the whip and vote for a bjp candidate against the shiv sena member?
there's no evidence required here my lords.
then, on 3rd of july, ajay chaudhary, acting as a leader of
the sslp, submitted a letter to the deputy speaker requesting him to
conduct the election of the speaker of the legislative assembly by division of votes.
ajay choudhary on the 3rd of july submitted a letter to the deputy
speaker, requesting that the votes cast by the members of the legislative assembly
who have incurred disqualification should not be considered during the election of the speaker.
3rd of july the election for the office of the speaker of maharashtra legislative
assembly was held, rahul narvekar, the candidate for the bharatiya janata party was unconstitutionally
elected as the speaker of the maharashtra legislative
assembly after getting a total of 164 votes.
during the elections it was recorded by the deputy speaker
that 39 delinquent mlas of shiv sena in a legislative
party led by eknath shinde had voted against the party whip.
now, my lords, at this point in time there is no other whip.
now you will see on the evening of the 3rd.
how many votes did the rival candidates poll on the 3rd of july?
that's all. we are not on majority minority.
that's correct. i'm glad that my learned friend pointed it out, my lords.
correct. therefore, if these 39 are excluded from 164, will they still have 125?
i am not on that my lords, i'm only saying that
they voted against the whip therefore, they are deemed to be disqualified.
that's all i'm saying.
i'm not saying, that he would have, supposing my lords all of
them are disqualified, because on that particular day they voted against the whip.
these 39? all 39. no, but therefore if you exclude these 39 from the 164.
yes. they're still down to, they still get 125.
right? your lordship is right, at the moment my lords, i am not challenging.
at the moment my lords.
because this comes soon on the heels of
the trust vote, which takes place on the 30th.
yes. so this is now an indicator within three days.
my lords, that's what happened on the 4th.
because, mr. sibal. that don't happened on the 30th my lord.
right, you don't, ultimately you don't, you don't face the trust vote.
yeah, i don't my lord and therefore it is held on the 4th.
and we challenged the trust vote also.
we've challenged all deficient, the elections, the speaker, the trust vote whatever.
all that is challenged.
my lords the question is, at the moment as
we are dealing with a very very limited issues.
one, should the courts have given time?
that is a separated issues because it's an order which is an interim order.
yeah. it's an interim order. what was the result of that my lords?
these people were able to topple the government without the disqualification petitions having been decided.
there was an elected government my lord which was in power.
the tenth schedule was used for the purposes of toppling an elected government and
supposing tomorrow, your lordship's posed by these actions which are uncontroverted that they disqualified themselves.
both, on both counts 2-1a, and 2-1b.
what will be the result?
and if your lordship's pose otherwise, let's assume against me. then this
will be, you have given them a model to topple every elected government.
mr. sibal, are we not still down to, if you are really looking
at the numbers here, are we not down to the situation where the
speaker's election at least indicates that if you, because 38 was sought to be disqualified.
there were disqualification petitions against the 38.
now if we exclude the 38 for a moment from the 164
who voted in favour of the resolution for the speaker, you still
have a situation where you, that's in very close proximity to the
date on which the trust vote was to be held, on the 30th.
yes. now you resign, right, on the 30th?
yes. and therefore, is this not really clearly an indicator that even excluding these 39.
, that's alright, the speaker could have been,
yes, i am not disputing that my lords.
i am not sure what the arithmetic is?
half, 145 is the halfway mark my lords.
without 34, you are below my lords, i'm sorry.
in fact, the arithmetic is the other way.
no, my lords 288, was the total strength.
just give us, we'll just give you the.
total strength of the assembly. 288. that was there from sibal's chart.
.
actual votes received by mr. narweker were 164,
which is over the 50% mark of 144.
i just, one second, total strength? half mark would be 145.
yes, so if 144 is the halfway mark, 145.
164 votes were received by mr. narveker if the strength was taken to be 288.
if 39 mlas are excluded from the strength of
the legislative assembly, the effective strength comes down to 249.
and out of those. just one second.
and the effective votes received by mr. narveker were
125, which is over 50% of the votes required.
so under any circumstances, even if 39 mlas are removed.
: only 16 disqualified. yes, plus on that date there were only 16 disqualifications.
but i'm going a step further, even if there
were 39 disqualifications, even then, mr. narvekar was proved.
what is the halfway mark of 249?
124 my lords. 125. 125. and he had 125.
exactly the same. yes.
and at 12:01, they moved a resolution expressing disqualification, expressing
no confidence, it is defeated and later again and defeated.
my lord, there were three independent disqualifications also, apart from this.
one second, sir, there were three disqualifications independent also were subject to disqualification.
so it makes it below 125. total is 41.
but then the strength of the house also comes down.
that's all right. but you don't get the majority then.
but as i said, we are getting involved in
issues that are not an issue before the court.
with 249, we will have to explore the independents also.
and therefore the halfway mark will accordingly be that.
is that what you are saying? so the total is, go over it again.
total strength of the assembly is 288.
the halfway mark is 145. that's right.
excluding the 39 shiv sena mlas and plus three independent mlas.just 1 second.
will be 246, my lords. and they would be having 122.
but my lord, the tenth schedule doesn't talk of any of this.
you can do the arithematic. so, we would be down to?
yeah, that is 42.
so the effective house, strength of the house comes to 288 minus 42.
yes, yes. which is 248 and 246.
123 is a halfway mark.
my lords, whether they won or lost is not the issue.
they will still be disqualified. no, we just.
that's all right. the constitutional. 123. 124 is the halfway mark.
124. my lords one more has to be given for to have half way mark.
so half way mark is 123 and narvekar gets 125?
three more my lords, that were disqualified.
you have included those three. 164 minus 42, my lords.
so 122. so when you, if you exclude those three then he gets 122.
yeah, 122.
so it's below the halfway mark, but these
are, the tenth schedule, is not concerned with this.
we're not concerned with that according to me.
one second, one second because we have said so.
how can three independent mlas.
now how can that is to be decided by the speaker.
you can say what you want.
but if there are three independent mlas, they can't be disqualified by you.
who says that procedure. they can't be.
my learned friend. mr. kaul you have to read the 10th schedule.
please read the 10th schedule before you make that submission.
my lords, unnecessarily there's no point in making
a submission which is contrary to the 10th schedule.
no, but the most crucial fact is that the
disqualification petitions are only against 16 and not not 39.
doesn't matter. but the disqualified mlas were only 16, not 39.
one second, in fact, on the third, all 39
are under disqualification because they voted against the whip.
that's after the speaker's. no, no. before the speaker.
we are proceeding towards the entirety of the 38 function, where is the position?
my lords, i don't think this arithmetic exercise is
of any relevance for the purposes of the 10th schedule.
we get your point that it's a 10th schedule issue.
yes correct. it is just a matter of arithmetic.
my lords majorities are made up 24 like this only.
i was on 14th. minus that 39, it was 125.
my lords we are not on 39, we are on 42.
just give us the number of, number that he has gotten, narvekar.
narvekar gets total 125 votes. is that right?
no, he gets 164. actual votes are 164.
yes.
now we have to, we have to now consider i mean,
we just saw the, from 164, you suppose deduct 39, which
are the 39 persons against whom you say, they are disqualified?
no. even the other three we said the same my lord.
we filed a petition to that.
therefore if you exclude 39, the shiv sena mlas and three independents.
so you exclude from 164, 42, you are down to 122.
that's correct. but they only had a 107.
they got a 107 votes for their speaker candidate.
the actual strength was 287. right.
if they had obeyed the whip, we'd be
in majority, he would not have got elected.
107 plus 39 or whatever.
so, this is, we are going into areas
which have really not our concern at the moment.
my concern is what happened and how the 10th
schedule, in fact, which was meant to deal with.
mr. sibal, that for it also appears that apart from the 39,
who according to you were disqualified, the three independents of course, that
you say they shouldn't have, they are also liable to be disqualified.
there are other members of your legislative party who
also voted in favor of mr. narvekar that day.
no, there some remained absent my lord.
they didn't vote. they didn't vote for that.
mr. narvekar polls 122. yes. after excluding 39 s s mlas and three independents, 42.
narvekar still polls 122. some must have been absent, some would have been absent.
there were 13 independents, my lords.
there are 13 independents, various parties, sp, bjp,
cpm, vba, mns, swabhiman party, rashtriya samaj paksha, asp.
all kinds of parties are there. my proposition has nothing to do with the speaker.
we get that point.
what you are really saying is that look,
irrespective of the numbers games, so to speak.
according to you the, first the speaker could
not have been thwarted from deciding the disqualification.
yes, yes.
and second, a trust vote could not be held
when the disqualification petition was still pending before the speaker.
that really is too. those are the two points my lord.
and the governor should not have sworn him in, that's the action of the governor.
he could not have sworn him, a man
my lords who is being, who is facing disqualification.
but this is what we also have to go into the wider issue as to
whether can a trust vote, in that sense or should a trust vote be postponed?
yeah. mainly because a disqualification petition is pending?
pending.
no my lords, is the question is whether time should have been given to them?
it all comes down to 27th of june.
27th, yes. that's the. so my lords, the trust vote only happened after that.
had that not happened, the trust vote would not have happened.
so therefore in other words what you are arguing is that the issue relating
to the 10th schedule must be done later and what is to be decided
is about the status of the party outside the legislative assembly which is to
be determined whether there is a split or
a dissent in the party as a primary issue.
yes, correct, i am deeply obliged.
and once that is decided, the question of
10th schedule triggers in thereafter, is your argument.
no, the tenth schedule triggers immediately, my lord.
haan, tenth schedule will trigger immediately. immediately, yes.
but for the tenth schedule, what is to be seen is
the events with respect to the political party, not the legislative party.
no, no. the tenth schedule cannot be subverted by members of the legislative party.
correct. taking a decision that there is a split in the party.
that is what i am saying. without there being a split in the party.
that's what i am saying. correct. so your primary argument is that.
my lord, is saying what i'm saying, that is what my lord is saying.
so i can't contradict that. now my lords, disqualification relates back to 21st of june.
that's the day that they have to show
what is their defense under the tenth schedule.
that's the day.
according to you the speaker under the tenth schedule only gives the declaration?
yes, yes. that's correct.
so whatever has happened after 21st june, it is always
subject to the disqualification from them is what you have submitted.
that's right. my lord because it relates back.
that's your lordships five judges have held that, constitution bench has held that.
so this is also one of the issues which is referred.
what will be the consequences in between?
that's correct. your lordship is right.
so that's why i've always said, nabam rebia and all
that has to be decided by your lordships one day.
all this has to go ahead.
today because the applications are pending, complaints are pending, the house is continuing.
yes. it's not lapsed by flux of time.
no. so the speaker is there for the house.
speaker decides today, 10th schedule complaints, it should relate back to.
that's 21st of june. 21st of june, 2022.
that's correct. that's correct. then in simple cases we should ask the speaker to decide.
but my lords, why ask the speaker to decide
for the simple reason, i'll tell your lordships why?
your other argument that court should decide is a different matter.
if the 10th schedule should operate, the complaints must
be decided by the speaker prima facie to start with.
so that the argument is just this.
yes. your lordship is right. decide now, he should decide now.
speaker is speaker irrespective to whoever it is.
correct. if he decides it will relate back.
correct, correct.
in other words to say, that we direct the speaker to take a decision.
the same thing should have happened to the deputy speaker on 27th of june.
mr. sibal assuming you are right in everything that you have argued.
that look first, the 27th order should not have been passed, that the
speaker should have been allowed to take a decision on the petitions for disqualification.
what is the net consequence of your argument?
i mean what direction. facts are undisputed.
what is the speaker to decide in this?
my lords, what is the speaker?
i want to know, what is the speaker to decide?
what is the .
my lords what is the speaker.they have not filed a reply till date.
no, but the question is who decides?
i mean the court can't take a decision on this?
why not? my lords, the court decided.
the court decided my lords in rana.
they have the power to decide a disqualification.
they decided on rana my lords, five judges decided
in rana, saying that we will not send it back.
the facts were undisputed. my lords, what is, what is that.
there can be no defense my lords because other
the tenth schedule there is no defense except a merger.
what is the speaker to decide?
and then your lordships will say we can't issue
a mandamus to the speaker to decide within seven days.
then there will be a constitutional issue referred to five judges, then?
because you can't issue a mandamus to the speaker.
justice nariman, says, within three months, you should decide.
no speaker accepts that judgment. where are we going?
that has got referred to constitution bench.
what are. where are we going my lords?
my lords the point.
since you are raising the question, it will require reconsideration of the court.
i am myself saying so my lords.
no, no, you please, whatever it is.
i have said so twice already. that's only a merger my lords.
that is not their case.
but mr. sibal, just as you say that look, on the 27th, the
speaker could not have been stultified in taking a decision on the disqualification
petitions, once we adopt that principle, then we have to be consistent and
apply the principle across the spectrum because there's a very valid point which
you are making which is that the speaker himself is a constitutional.or the speaker themselves.
i shouldn't say himself, the speaker themselves are constitutional authorities.
therefore the speaker has to take a decision under the tenth schedule.
if that is so, then we have to be extremely circumspect about, you know,
replacing the mechanism, the institutional mechanism, which has been provided by the tenth schedule itself.
the problem in this case is my lords
that this is because we perpetuated an illegality.
now the speaker came into existence by perpetuating an illegality.
and now you are giving the clothe of authority to
that speaker who has actually come into place because by.
we can't reinstate the.
we can't reinstate the earlier speaker because there we are clenching upon the.
in nabam rebia you did it. in nabam rebia you did it.
in fact, you reinstated the entire government.
i'm not saying you should do it, my lords.
but if your lordships ask me that question, that's exactly what happened in nabam rebia.
mr. sibal, would the court not be getting into the thicket of
the entire gamut by virtually clothing itself with the powers of the speaker?
no, because the facts are undisputed.
my lords that's why i said these are undisputed documents.
there is no political thicket here.
what you're saying is put the clock back in every which way.
when you say a speaker. ultimately mr. sibal, it will boil down to this.
you have to say that well, if you are logically
consistent that retrace your steps to the position in which
we were before the 27th of, before the 27th of june.
that's what i said.
when i argued nabam, that's what i said and the court accepted it.
that's exactly what i said. because you cannot my lords.
this is all staring us in the face.
as i said, forget a majority, minority.
even five people can dislodge a government by saying
that all right, we have a trust vote now.
new speaker is appointed. then every time the same thing will happen.
my lords, your lordships looks at the other point of view.
if you do not my lords, stop this menace now.
it will be perpetuated. that's the other issue.
i'm not saying your lordships, whatever your lordships will do will be acceptable.
no, we are trying to explore that even assuming that your
argument is correct, where does it lead the constitutional court to?
i mean, therefore, that is something which would like to.
there are many things you can do.
your lordships can say you decide it within seven days only and
you challenge the order if it's against you, before us after seven days.
sorry come again? you decide it within 7 days.
they have not even filed a reply.
let's assume. i am giving your lordships the options.
decide it within 7 days. we are sitting here.
if there is an order against you, you come
up and appeal and then we decide the matter.
in fact, the speaker issued notice against us on the 8th of july.
he has not even issued notice in their matter, in our matter.
so, to have clarity mr. sibal, you say that we
ask this speaker to decide the disqualification of the 39 mlas.
ask him to do so within a stipulated period, we will then challenge.
the two options that speaker may come to the conclusion that they are disqualified.
then what happens? my lords, then what happens?
they will come in appeal. no, but how does that affect?
what is consequence practically in terms of the trust vote which takes place?
speakers, alright, assuming that the court has the power.
chief minister will go. the chief minister will go.
how? 164-1b. he cannot hold office. 39 people will go out.
and he will not be chief minister.
disqualifies them. and he will not be the chief minister.
39 people then, if your argument is right, if
the speaker holds that well, they are not disqualified those.
then you have a right to challenge that order before an appropriate court.
not appropriate, before your lordship. whatever.
if the speaker comes to the conclusion that
there is a disqualification, those 39 persons go.
in this case according to eknath shinde also, therefore has to move out.
yes. then what is the next? what is the sequitur?
nothing. then whoever is the chief minister will get back on the trust vote.
we'll see about that.
then this court order on 29th said, trust vote
is subject to these petitions, all proceedings, all proceedings.
well this is the problem my lord, the judicial orders are passed law.
we are put in these situations. then we are asked, what can we do now?
we are not saying, what can we do.
what we are asking is what is your submission on what we can do?
no, no my lords.
mr. sibal, ultimately you are arguing a constitutional point, but we have to also
factor relief which a constitutional court then should give or can is capable of
granting within the format of the constitution to take the argument to its logical conclusions.
so we are not, we're not for a moment saying that your argument is incorrect.
what we are trying to do now is
to test what are the limits of your argument.
how far should the court go. as i told your lordships, your lordship is right.
that's why, why did i say seven days, because your
lordships puts it to me, ultimately, what should be done?
and i said, your lordships its alright, give him seven days.
but then the question will arise, can you issue
a mandamus to the speaker to decide within seven days?
and there will be a constitutional crisis because the speaker will not obey.
that we don't know now. i don't know, it is possible.
it has happened before. it has happened before.
nekchandra is the only case where there is
a direction for an early disposal of the petition.
that's the only exception.
and that again got referred to a constitution
bench and saying that you can't direct this.
correct. now my lord, justice nariman's judgment.
in this also the same thing happened.
the other problem is. sorry. fundamental issues.
we've challenged decisions of 3rd of july, of the speaker.
my lords, we are the party that's fundamental.
before anything is done by the speaker.
so your lordships, my respectful submission.please consider the decisions
and then whatever the outcome is, let the outcome be.
but a shortcut of this nature will lead us nowhere.
<<lunch break>> so my lords as i was on the list of dates, let me
finish that first. so i was on item 47. now 48 - as the delinquent
mlas of sslp voted against the party whip on 2nd july, issued regarding the election
office of the speaker, election of the office of the speaker. fresh disqualification proceedings were
initiated against the delinquent mlas as per the provisions of 2(1)(b) of the 10th schedule.
because whether they voted against the party whip so all 39 were involved in there.
so 16 earlier, then on the 27th my lords the balance 22, for
which my lords notice has not yet been issued, and all 39 now.
this is 2(1)(b). that is 2(1)(a) and even for this notice has not been issued.
so this 3rd july, issued against how many you said?
39, 39 for two under 2(1)(b) for violating the whip.
i'm sorry. fresh one?
fresh one, 2(1)(a) my lord, 16 earlier for which notice
was issued and 22 later for which petition was filed.
but then, of course, next day was a trust vote.
i mean, there was a decision and therefore, no notice has been issued.
even now, notice has. no notice has been issued.
so those are all pending. and now the 39.
now the 39. that's correct. that's correct.
so and the election of the speaker was held in complete violations of provision.
certain mlas submitted letter notices to the principal secretary of maharashtra led to removal
a resolution, for removal of rahul narvekar from the office of speaker under 179.
this is the tit for tat my lords.
this is not an argument that i wish to make.
on 3rd of july 2022, just after being elected as the speaker
of the house, narveker entered the political thicket and issued a communication
late in the evening on 3rd of july illegally recognizing bharat gogawale
as the chief whip and eknath shinde as the leader of the party.
and what basis did he do that my lords?
this is under challenge. under which power did the speaker do that?
your lordship knows my lords. this has to come from the political party.
leader of the house has to come from the
political party that he is our leader of the house.
my lords that letter is written by the speaker my lords.
for example, recently when my lords, mr. kharge became the leader of the congress party.
it is mrs. gandhi, who wrote a letter saying that now instead
of gulam nabi azad, mr. kharge is the leader of the party,
i have the letter with me. so this is the this is the.
on what basis did the speaker do it?
the aforesaid communication of the speaker of 3rd july was challenged
by sunil prabhu before this honorable court, wherein the honorable court
by the order dated 4-7 and writ petition directed to list
the writ petition along with other connected writ petitions, so that's also pending.
then 4-7, as the speaker has misconducted himself by entering into the
political thicket and attempted to recognize bharat gogawale as the chief whip
of the shiv sena, certain mla submitted a notice to the principal
secretary, maharashtra legislative assembly to move a resolution for removal of narvekar from the office.
then, on 4-7, the confidence motion was called for on
the floor of the maharashtra legislative assembly by eknath shinde.
on 4th july confidence motion was carried out in favor of eknath shinde.
again several mlas of shiv sena voted contrary to the
whip issued by the official chief whip of shiv sena.
4-7-2022 bharat gogawale, and my lords when your lordships will see
the petition before the election commission, till the 18th of july,
there is no reference to any meeting of any political party.
so all this was happening outside the political party.
bharat gogawale also files disqualification petitions against 14 mlas under the
10th schedule for the alleged breach of the whip issued by him.
it is submitted that bharat gogawale has not been authorized by shiv
sena political party to issue whips on behalf of the shiv sena.
5-7-2022, since the delinquent mlas of the sslp has openly defied the
whip dated 2-7-2022 in the floor test, confidence motion held on 4-7.
sunil prabhu has filed fresh disqualification petition against
39 delinquent mlas seeking their disqualification under 2(1)(b).
then 07-07-2022 uddhav thackeray, in his capacity as president of shiv sena wrote
a letter to the speaker objecting to the illegal recognition of bharat gogawale
as the whip of the shiv sena, and reiterated the decision of the
shiv sena political party to recognize sunil prabhu as a whip of the sslp.
so my lords, what's happening here is, that the legislative party,
a majority in the legislature of the maharashtra legislative assembly is
treating itself as the political party and making orders for its own benefit.
that's the constitutional issue that your lordships will have to decide.
but who represents the political party is a.
as i said, my lords, it's the two offices.
my lords, that is the leader of the three offices, chief whip
and whip are appointed by the political party and conveyed to the.
chief whip and the.? and the deputy whip.
these are.
these are offices my lords, that are bridge
between the political party and the legislative party.
and according to you who determines who is the political party?
i'm sorry, who determines who is the political?
there's no challenge here.
no. i mean, ultimately, who is entrusted with the authority to decide.
they have to have a split in the party
first otherwise, how do you determine another 10th schedule party.
if there is a contest then who represents the political party?
who will decide? there's no contest. my lords, this is not their case.
my lords please appreciate.
till all this is happening, it is not their
case that there is a split in the political party.
it is nobody's case. they say they are the shiv sena .
that's here.
but who will then have the authority to decide who is the political party?
that's right.
now you go, what you do is call a meeting of the political party.
supposing my lord, let's forget about the 10th schedule.
let's not talk about 10th schedules.
my lords, i happen to be a faction in the party
and i say, look, actually, the majority of the party is
with me. so like an requisition of meeting of the party.
forget the 10th schedule and after a requisition of
meeting in the party my lords, i take over.
so i am the party. by majority i take over.
10th schedule. and there's nothing to do with the 10th schedule.
i'm not talking about the 10th schedule now.
i'm sorry. the test as they have said.
the test in sadiq ali. in sadiq ali has nothing to do with this issue.
i mean that's not. i'm not talking of the 10th schedule now.
i'm talking generally how a faction in a party can take over the party.
forget the 10th schedule. now my lords forget that 1985 10th schedule was not there.
then also this question would arise.
but this question would arise only if there is a division in the legislative party.
dehors the 10th schedule. i hope my lords, i have made myself clear.
dehors the 10th schedule this question can arise, that people in the
legislative party can say that look, no, we don't agree with your policies.
let's call a meeting of the party.
right?
in that meeting my lords, they feel that they are a
faction who are entitled my lord to the symbol of the party.
we want to set up a separate party, right?
they can go and say that we, the
legislators, along with the organizational structure, are the party.
separate party. give us the symbol. we are the majority.
forget the 10th schedule. it can happen even out.
but that can only happen if there's a split in the legislative party.
correct, my lords?
it can only happen then, otherwise, it's a normal
procedure of taking over the presidentship of the party.
sadiq ali the same thing happened.
there was a split in the in the legislative party and the political party.
and in sadiq ali they said that look as far as the
organizational structure is concerned, on both issues, on both issues, they are entitled.
the other side is entitled to the symbol.
that's fine. no issue.
here, my lords this split should have happened on the 21st of june.
that is nobody's case in the political party.
why? because para.
15 of the 10th schedule says that if there are two factions,
and the symbols order says, if there are two factions resulting from
a split in the political party then the question of symbol will arise.
right, my lords? it is nobody's case here.
nobody. they say they are the shiv sena?
why? because they are 40.
so how does a majority in the legislative assembly become the shiv sena.
then my lords if in the congress in goa, if majority of
the congress legislators join, as they do my lords, i have been
seeing this happen again and again, my lords, then they are the congress.
you can say they are the congress.
how can they say that?
therefore, my lords this has grave consequences on the polity of this country.
because now the legislative party seems to believe that it can under
the 10th schedule proclaim itself to be the political party and throw
out office bearers, who are appointed by the political party in the house.
constitutionally that cannot be countenanced. who appoints the leader of the house?
it says.
in exercise of my power as chairperson of the congress parliamentary party,
i hereby make the following appointment to the rajya sabha, sri kharge
mp leader of the congress party against the vacancy of ghulam nabi
azad, whose term in the rajya sabha has come to an end on 15th february.
this is a letter written by the congress upa chairperson to the speaker.
so the chairman of the congress .of the rajya sabha.
that's how that's how my lords, people are appointed.
can my lords mr. kharge on his own,
could he have said that i am the leader?
i have so many mps, so i am the leader?
the same thing with the whip. now my lords 57.
the newly elected speaker in an illegal, arbitrary and blatent display of malafide, how do
you know allows the speaker to decide this matter when he's been doing these things?
your lordships, my lords have great, great, what should i
say.confidence in the constitutional office of the speaker my lords.
great confidence. but do they discharge this confidence?
that confidence you also have when you say
that that speaker had to decide that disqualification petition.
yes. correct my lords. and that is not dependent.
it will be subject to challenge. subject to challenge.
and that is not dependent on who is the speaker mr. sibal?
no my lords, i am sorry. that speaker did not do anything like this.
my lords, you have to now see.
kindly see look what is happening.
but the constitutional authority of the speaker to decide is not
based on who the speaker is or what it decisions he take.
my lords, can ever finding of a bias be reached by a constitutional court.
your lordships will say - no. let's put it another constitutional issue.
if a constitutional authority has so conducted itself.
that a constitutional court comes to the conclusion that such a constitutional
authority cannot discharge the functions that it is discharging because it's open bias.
your lordships will say - no, we let them decide.
i don't know my lords. i don't have the answer for it.
no not necessarily. rameshwar prasad with respect to a governor.
governor yes.
judgement of this court that if there is an allegation
of bias, then government has to come and defend it.
mr. sibal: my lords that's exactly.
it's possible not that the court will naturally do it.
but then we all are proceeding on the premise that.
in fact, your argument had been in the first part also,
that so far the speaker is concerned it is the constitutional authority.
no. but see what he has done?
he has appointed the whip. he has appointed the leader of the house.
then what kind of confidence can we have this, in this constitutional
authority who without reference to the political party is doing all this?
do you think he can ever decide in my favor?
there is no way.
then you have a first speaker who in
defiance of the legislative rules gives two days' notice.
i'm sorry. no. that is. in defiace of the legislative rules gives two days' notice.
that your lordships have. they all. this is the way everybody is behaving.
that is correct. so what do we do my lords?
your lordships will then have to. there are two options.
either you debunk the authority of the speaker
or you say that irrespective of what the.
i said that on day one.
alternately irrespective of what lesser mortals decide, ultimately, in
a democracy you value the office of the institution.
then that 27th order should not. if we start.if we say.
then that 27th order should not have been passed.
denigrating constitutional offices, including the office of the
speaker, it's a. my lord they are denigrating themselves.
they are denigrating themselves. we are not denigrating.
no, mr. sibal, there is some problem.
it is a race to the bottom then.
yes we are. we have to start my lords.
what to do? what to do?
but the problem is my lords, that problem is very serious and therefore, therefore.
it is the.they are the legislators, parliamentarians, who have decided upon the
speaker to be the tribunal per the 10th schedule is parliamentarian's decision.
correct. i agree. so therefore, court is only interpreting that.
fine my lords. then we must go back to 2017.
take this anywhere mr. sibal, the difficulty repeatedly uses at
one stage it poses a very big problem for the court.
on the one hand, if the speaker is with
you, you would say that it's a constitutional authority.
what's wrong with the speaker?
if you have some difficulty, you would say -- you means not you.
you would say, look at the way the speakers have behaved.
so therefore, for us as long as the constitution
bench judgment is there, we will go by the fact.
i agree.
speaker he is the tribunal and he is the presiding officer per the 10th schedule.
correct, correct. and we will not, go back the decision.
that's the final decision so far as we are concerned.
fine. i don't.
i don't want to my lords say anything contrary to that except
that on that logic the 27th order could not have been passed.
then we come back to that my lords.
then that's what led to what we.
where we are where we are today.
and again, it's merely because one or two speakers have gone astray would the
court be inclined to debunk the whole procedure as laid down and the 10th schedule?
no. my lords. my intention is not that.
i'm just my lords telling your lordships what has been happening.
so it's a conundrum? yes, it's a conundrum.
it's a constitutional conundrum. but your lordships will one day have to sort it out.
sorry for. another question.
every time this question is raised before the court, i would want
to ask you how many times did the parliamentarians raise this question
in the parliament saying that let us actually amend the constitution, change the speaker?
how many times the discussion took place in
the parliament to review the conduct of the speaker?
why is that question raised before for the court,
which is not the forum for us for the consideration?
how many times the parties have sat down
together and decided that this is not working?
once kihoto hollohan was rendered my lords, what would parliament would say?
it only upheld the 10th schedule. it is you are making the 10th schedule.
no my lords, it is the political party in power, wherever it is,
wants to use the office of the speaker to do what they are doing.
the political party would never empowered, would never like to change it.
this will take us nowhere mr. sibal, frankly and this will.
unless there's an amendment to the constitution, unless there is a reference, a direct challenge.
justice sabharwal says. we have to proceed on that premise.
justice sabharwal said it in a judgment of this court.
jagjit singh. jagjit singh. exactly that.
'undoubtedly our constitutional scheme, the speaker enjoys a pivotal position. the position of the
speaker is and has been held by people of outstanding ability and impartiality without
meaning any disrespect for any particular speaker in the country, but only going by
some of the events of the recent past.recent past. certain questions have been raised
about the confidence in the matter of impartiality on some issues having political overturns
which are decided by the speaker in his capacity as a tribunal. it has
been urged that, if not checked, it may ultimately affect the high office of
the speaker. our attention has been drawn to the recommendations made by the national
commission to review the working of the constitution, recommending that the power to decide
on the question as to disqualification on the ground of defection should vest in
the election commission.' - i dread that as of today
my lords, election commission, instead of the speaker of the house.
- 'concerned. our attention has also been drawn to the views of a number
of other experts, committees, commissioners to the effect that power of disqualification as a
result of defection needs to be exercised in accordance with the opinion of the
commission as in the case of decision on questions as to disqualification of members.
whether to vest such power of the speaker or election commission or other institution
is not for us to decide' - as your
lordship rightly said -'this is for parliament to decide.
' exactly. i agree. i am not disputing that.
but i'm just saying that disquiet, that my lords
we have witnessed in the functioning of the office.
that's all that i'm saying.
i'm not saying this person is good or that person is good.
it's the institutional framework within which he functions my
lords is not consistent with his responsibilities as a tribunal.
that's all that i'm saying my lords.
what to do?
but the fact is that he had no authority in law
to decide on the whip and on the leader of the house.
that's not his. that is a separate issue.
we have made a note of that.
that's why i made that argument.
then my lords, come to 'the newly elected speaker in a illegal, arbitrary and
a blatant display of malafide and bias, issued notice to 14 mlas seeking their
response to disqualification petitions filed by bharat gogawale. the speaker is still sitting tight
on the disqualification petitions filed by sunil prabhu and has not even issued notice
in them despite their disqualification petitions being filed much earlier.' he issues notice on our.
on their disqualification petition, but not on ours.
and they haven't filed a reply, my lords.
this court said in the interim we adjourn it to 10th.
12th of july. my lords, from july we are in february, where's the reply?
18th of july, the notice issued by the speaker in the disqualification petitions
filed by bharat gogawale against 14 shiv sena mlas including sunil prabhu was
challenged by sunil prabhu in writ petition wherein this honorable court vide oder
dated that directed to tag the writ petition along with other connected matter.
so that's also before your lordships.
and now my lords, the election commission says they are the shiv sena.
now we will be further disqualified.
any meeting called if we don't attend, then we are.
there will be further problems.
despite the fact that this honorable court is seized of the issues regarding
disqualification of eknath shinde under the 10th schedule, shinde, filed a petition before
the election commission under para 15 of the election symbol's reservation and allotment
order to declare the splinter group led by him as the shiv sena.
so this is the first time my lords that he went.
on 20th july vide order dated 20th july, and order connected
in writ petition so and so another connected petition, this court
issued notice in writ petition so and so, it was directed
by this honorable court the writ petition shall be treated as a lead matter.
20th july pursuant to the order of the court dated 20th july, shri
subhash desai made a representation to the eci vide representation requesting the eci
to not proceed with any petition related to shiv sena as substantially similar
matters, and issues are pending before this honorable
court and not to take any preemptive actions.
then ia 100285 was filed on 21st july, was preferred by sunil prabhu in
writ petition, seeking direction to the speaker maharashtra assembly to produce the following records.
all proceedings relating to disqualification of rebel shiv sena mlas filed by sunil prabhu.
all proceedings related to disqualification filed by shri gogawale.
all proceedings of the speaker and deputy speaker in relation to
recognition of the leader of the house and chief whip of
shiv sena, proceedings of the house on 3rd july and 4th july.
22nd july without deference to the proceedings pending before this court
as well as without considering that no adjudication can take place
till disqualification petition is pending against delinquent mlas are decided, election
commission issued noticed to uddhav thackeray on the petition file by eknath shinde.
and on 25th july aggrieved by the issuance of the notice by
the election commission in shinde's petition, subhash desai has filed two applications
ia so and so, seeking impleadment of election commission of india as
respondent 51 in writ petition so and so and seeking stay of
proceedings initiated by the commission on 22-7 till the final adjudication of the present petition.
on 4th of august this court, after hearing the election commission and
the parties, recorded the submission of the commission that no orders may
need to be passed by this court interdicting proceedings before the election commission.
liberty was granted to the petitioner to file
an application before the election commission for seeking time.
accordingly, 6th august - petitioner, in terms of the order of 4th august
filed an application with a prayer to defer/adjourn the proceedings in dispute on one.
on dispute no. 1/ 2022 for four weeks and
extended the time for filing a response for four weeks.
10th august, election commission communicated to the petitioner for extending time.
23rd august honorable court vide it's order held that the
present batch of petitions raised important.then those questions were my lords.
then your lordships please come to 23rd august.
made a request on the very same date to the commission to defer proceedings.
then this went on my lords and on 22nd of september a further
request was made by the petitioner to the commission for deferment of proceedings
by two weeks till this court decides the question as to whether proceedings
before the commission should go on and then 27 december your lordships dismissed the application.
so that created another problem my lords because the election
commission decided the matter dehors my lords, these pending proceedings.
and on the basis of that majority in
the legislative assembly has given them the symbol.
with that very majority subject of disqualification petitions.
so we have another problem.
and we went to the commission and said - please await the decisions.
the supreme court did not stay. didn't stay the proceedings.
but the supreme court did not say that you decide it on merits based on.
based on majority in the legislative assembly.
because those disqualification petitions are pending.
but he said - no. supreme court has said no stay.
so i will decide the entire matter.
that's, that's the other problem that happened.
but i never thought your lordships meant stay of proceedings only meant
that you decide that whatever the matter is, you hear the arguments.
decide the . on law, on the submissions made, where they took it.
the high court also took it the same way my lords.
we went to the high court also.
they rejected it, saying, your lordships have said no stay.
therefore the commission can decide what it likes.
and i told the commission that look, if supposing you give this symbol to them
based on this majority, and ultimately they are disqualified, then what happens to the symbol?
will we get back the symbol?
so my lords we have another problem on our hands.
so only your lordships can decide this matter.
we can only place the facts before people.
you have to.
you have to do something to be able to ensure that
there is confidence in institutional frameworks in the system, in this country.
that's my only concern. winning or losing doesn't matter.
these are political battles, will be won today and lost tomorrow
or lost today and won tomorrow, but the institution must go on.
the people of india must have confidence in that institution, whether it's
the election commission or the office of the speaker or the court.
now my lords, then we come to 4th october, eknath shinde filed an
application before the commission under para 15 of the symbols' order to urgently
hear, dispose off, and allow the petition filed by shinde under paragraph 15.
on 7th october, thackeray filed a preliminary reply to the
application under para 15 with a prayer requesting commission not
to pass any order without an opportunity of oral hearing to thackeray.
my lords on 8th october, thackeray filed a reply to
the application of shinde under para 18 of the symbol's order.
election commission without hearing either of the parties -- this is another curious
thing - on 8th october, without hearing either of the parties and merely
hours after the reply of uddhav thackeray was filed passed an order in
dispute no. 1/ 2022 inter alia freezing the symbol of bow and arrow.
and your lordship knows my lords, that the hearing is required.
it's mandatory under paragraph 15.
also, the election commission directed uddhav thackeray and eknath shinde to
first furnish their preferences for interim party names and interim symbols.
uddhav thackeray under protest and without prejudice to his right to challenge
the impugned order freezing the symbol bow and arrow proposed three interim
names and interim symbols of his own choice in the order of preference.
10th october, shinde proposed his preferences of symbols out of which first
two were identical to the interim symbols proposed by the uddhav thackeray.
the first interim name proposed by shri shinde was
also identical to the first interim name proposed by thackeray.
on 10th october, election commissioner rejected the first two interim symbols
proposed by thackeray on the basis of shinde had also proposed.
due to some same reason shri uddhav thackeray
was denied the interim name shiv sena balasaheb thackeray.
on 10th october aggrieved by the arbitrary freezing of symbol without affording
an opportunity of oral hearing, vide order dated that passed by the
commission, in dispute no. 1/ 22 uddhav thackeray filed a writ petition
in the high court of delhi seeking inter alia to quash the aforesaid order.
election commissioner allotted the interim name, balasahebanchi shiv sena to shri eknath
shinde and requested shinde to furnish a fresh preference list of symbols.
11/10 eknath shinde submitted a fresh list of preferred symbols.
election commissioner allotted, the symbol of do talwarein aur ek dhaal to shri eknath shinde.
the present batch of matters was listed before the
constitution bench for directions on such and such date.
then my lords election commission addressed a letter to uddhav thackeray and
shinde asking to submit all the details, particulars documents to dispute one
and the high court of delhi dismissed the petition filed by uddhav thackeray.
we'll have. the date of the decision.
yesterday or day before? election commission. now the election commission.
17th february.
so that my lords is really the list of dates and the list of events.
my lords having said that, just let's go to the tenth schedule straightaway.
in this schedule, unless the context otherwise requires, house means.in this schedule, unless the
context otherwise requires house means either house of parliament or the legislative assembly or
as the case may be either house of the state legislative of the state.
' legislation party in relation.
just my lords justice to have the facts straight my lords out of
55, 38 are with them in the maharashtra legislative assembly, right my lord?
and in the lok sabha, out of 18, they allege that
13 are with them but they have filed affidavits of 12.
the legislative council my lords in maharashtra all of them are with us.
all 12 are with us. twelve out of twelve?
all of them are with us.
and in the rajya sabha, three out of three are with us.
and in the lok sabha six are with us, according to us.
mr. sibal, will you repeat the numbers?
yes my lord. in the legislative council in maharashtra, all 12 are with us.
all twelve are with us.
but in the legislative assembly my lords, 38 are with
them, you say 40, but they have the affidavit of 38.
it's all right, you can say 40.
i don't mind. yeah, it's all right.
40 and 15 with us, doesn't matter.
in the rajya sabha, all 3 are with us
and in the lok sabha, my lords, out of 18.19?
13 are with them and 6 are with us.
so it is not as if, it is some overwhelming majority with them.
and in the organizational structure, and my lords.
what about rajya sabha you said? lok sabha?
three rajya sabha, are all with us.
and lok sabha? lok sabha, my lords, 6 are with us out of 19.
out of 18.
so in two houses they have majority and in two houses we have majority.
but be that as it may, this is, the issue is ultimately not that.
but just so that your lordship knows, in the organizational structure, the other
surprising thing is my lords, we both argued on the constitution of 2018.
what is organization? pratinidhi sabha.
there is the pratinidhi sabha and there is the karya karini, which
is the executive, largest executive body, 13 members of the karya karini.
upto 260 odd members of the pratinidhi sabha, which we will come to later.
okay. the point that i'm making is that we both relied upon the 2018 constitution.
but the commission in it's order without letting us know during
the argument, said that 2018 constitution is not recorded in the, in.
the election commission. never put it to us.
never told us, not their argument, not my argument.
both argued on the 2018 constitution and the commission without
ever informing us, says that constitution is not on our record.
anyway, be that as it may. anyway, so even though we
have majority in the organization, they say we will not consider that.
so they don't consider the organization.
they consider these majority of those who are
according to us disqualified and give them the symbol.
so you move from the speaker to the election commission.
and then from there, where do you go?
anyway, so let's now come to 10th schedule.
the legislature party, in relation to a member of a house belonging to
any political party, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 or 4,
means the group consisting of all the members of that house for the
time being belonging to that political party in accordance with the said provisions.
so your lordships, sees the symbiotic relationship between the legislative party and the political party.
the original political party in relation to a member of a house, means the
political party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph one of paragraph two.
paragraph means paragraph in this schedule.
then two, subject to the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5,
a member of a house belonging to any political party shall
be disqualified from being a member of the house, if he
voluntarily, if he has voluntarily given up his membership of such political party.
or if he votes or abstains from voting in such house, contrary to
any direction issued by the political party to which he belongs or by
any reason or by any person or authority authorized by it in this
behalf, without obtaining in either case the prior permission of such political party,
person or authority and such voting or abstention has not been condoned by
such political party, person or authority within 15
days from the date of such voting or abstention.
so my lord, what's important here to note is that he
cannot vote contrary to any direction issued by the political party.
so obviously, in terms of paragraph 3, it is the
political party which issues the direction not the legislative party.
and the direction is issued through the leader of the political
party, normally the whip or the leader of the political party.
such person authorized.
so therefore, the political party will authorize such
person and he is my lords the whip.
the whip, term is not used in the 10th schedule as you will notice.
the term used is direction.
or by any person or authority authorized, without obtaining
in either case the prior permission of such political party.
now, my lords, whose permission has to be
obtained if i want to vote against the whip?
political party's permission. and political party is outside the house, not within the house.
within the house are only legislatures.
so you'll have to go to the whip, you'll have to
go to the whip or the person authorized, that look, i
want to vote against or i want to make a speech against.
i don't agree with this bill. and some times actually whips do agree.
it has happened so often with us.
you say, no, these particular clauses i don't.
allow me to speak, but i will vote for
you ultimately, because i don't want to violate the whip.
but allow me to speak. and sometimes we are allowed.
then my lords, kindly come to the explanation.
for the purposes of this sub-paragraph, an elected member of a house
shall be deemed to belong to the political party, if any, by
which he was set up as a candidate for election as such member.
a nominated member of a house shall, where he is a
member of any political party on the date of his nomination,
as such member be deemed to belong to such political party.
in any other case he deemed.be deemed to belong to the political party of
which he becomes, or as the case may be, first, becomes a member before
the expiry of six months from the date on which he takes his seat
after complying with the requirements of 99 or as the case may be article 180.
so a nominated member within six months actually can join a party.
not after six months. then subsection two, is very important.
an elected member of a house who has been elected as such otherwise than
as a candidate set up by any political party shall be disqualified for being
a member of the house if he joins any political party after such election.
i belong to that category my lords.
if i try and join any other party, i shall be disqualified.
anglo indians. that's right. that's for nomination my lords.
three. yes.
three is, a nominated member shall be disqualified being a member
of the house if he joins any political party after six months.
that's what i told your lordships, from the date on which
he takes his seat after complying with the requirements of 99.
notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, a person who on
the commencement of the constitution is a member of a house whether elected or
nominated as such, shall where he is a member of a political party immediately
before such commencement be deemed for the purposes of subparagraph-one of this paragraph, to
have been elected as a member of such
house as a candidate set up by such party.
in any other case, be deemed to be
elected, this we don't, really worry about that.
para three, is now deleted. let's see what para 3 said.
your lordships will find that in statutes my lords, item number three.
page 48. pdf 50. yes, pdf page 50.
your lordship has that? yes. yes. my lords, justice shah has it?
now, disqualification account a defection not to apply in case of split.
where a member of a house makes a claim that he and any
other members of his legislature party, constitute the group representing a faction which
has arisen as a result of a split in his original political party
and such group consists of not less than 1/3rd of the members of
such legislative party, he shall not be disqualified under subparagraph one, of paragraph 2.
so paragraph 3, as it then stood operated on the
assumption that there is a split in the original political party.
a split in the legislative party could not have
been a defense even if it is more than one-third.
there has to be a split in the original political party.
correct. now how does that split happen?
because he makes a claim before all this happened.
demonstrates in the claim that a split has occurred.
calls for a meeting of the original political party,
as a faction, has a resolution passed, breaks away.
breaks away my lords and then if he is one-third, it's a defense.
even if he loses in capturing the party, he shall
not be disqualified in the paragraph two, that he has voluntarily.
sorry, that such group consists of not less than one-third of the members of
such legislative party, he shall not be disqualified under subparagraph-one of para two, on
the ground that he has voluntarily given up his membership of the original political
party or that he has voted or abstained from voting in such house contrary
to any direction issued by such party, or by any reason or authority authorized
by it in that behalf, without obtaining the prior permission of such party, person
or authority, and such voting or abstention has not been condoned by such party,
person or authority within 15 days from the date of which such voting or abstention.
and from the time of such split, such factions shall be deemed to be
the political party to which he belongs, for the purposes of subparagraph one of
two, and to be his original political party for the purpose of that paragraph.
so the splinter group of that party can be a separate political party.
he will, because he is one third in the legislature belong to that party.
because that becomes his original political party.
none of this has happened here.
the quantum of the split interestingly was not defined in terms of numbers.
so long as there is a split, the 1/3rd
in relation to the group representing the legislative party.
yes, yes. i agree my lord. that split may be minority, majority, it doesn't matter.
right. so long as you know, there is a split.
there is a split. in the original political political party.
correct, correct. so that's not the case here my lords.
on 21st june, they were in gujarat, and
they were in the northeast, only the legislative members.
and they never said there's a split.
they said we are the shiv sena.
so that claim was also not there.
then came the 91st amendment, 2003. sorry, 1st january 2004.
no, no. yes, yes an act of 2003,
but came into force on 1st january 2004.
then my lords, ten was amended. that's important.
yes. now my lords, kindly see this constitutional amendment.
they have amended 164, of the constitution which you will find in pdf page 52.
in article. i'm sorry.
article 164 of the constitution after clause-one, the following clauses have been inserted.
where are we? pdf page 52. pdf page 52.
yes. this is the, the amendment starts at pdf page 51.
and the relevant part, because 1a and 1b have been added.
and if you see section-c, of that.
in article 164, of the constitution after clause-1, the following clauses shall
be inserted namely, 1a, the total number of ministers including chief minister
in the council of ministers in the state shall not exceed 15%
of the total number of members of the legislative assembly of that state.
provided, the number of ministers including the chief minister shall not be less than twelve.
provided further, we are not concerned with that.
1d, my lords, a member of the legislative assembly of a state, or either
house of the legislature of a state having legislative council belonging to any political
party who is disqualified for being a minister of that house under paragraph 2
of the 10th schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a minister
under clause 1 for duration of the period commencing from the date of his
disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as such member
would expire or where he contests any election to the legislative assembly of a
state or either house of the legislative of a state having legislative council, as
the case may be before the expiry of such period till
the date on which he is declared elected, whichever is earlier.
this also creates a lot of problems.
that problem doesn't confront us in this case, because most of these
people then resign, join the other party, get elected and become ministers.
so there is some scope for challenge to this particular provision, on it's constitutionality.
but be that as it may, we are concerned with the
earlier parts that if you are disqualified, you can't be a minister.
now your disqualification is pending, matter is before the constitution bench, matter is
before the speaker, whichever it may be and you are appointed by the governor.
and also there's a provision of representation of peoples act, where they can't contest again.
that's right. not for this my lords, not for the 10th schedule.
that is for other corrupt practice. there is no period here.
that's why i say this is subject to challenge.
right.
they are my lords for all kinds of other reasons,
corrupt practice and he's been convicted for x number of years.
now, what is happening in a ordinary case of a dharna on a road, trial
court convicts you for two years and you lose your membership of the legislative assembly.
that's also happening. we can see it, headline news everywhere.
what do we do? we can't keep on coming to court, every other day.
your lordships will also get fed up with us.
sorry. how many times do we give you justice?
now kindly.
so therefore now the bottom line is, there is no concept of a split anymore.
then the statement of objects and reasons for
deletion of the paragraph, paragraph at pdf page 54.
this is para 2, the committee on electoral reforms.
demands have been made from time to time to certain,
in certain quarters for strengthening and amending the anti-defection law.
where that is? my lords at pdf page 54.
the objects and reasons of the deletion.
may i read that my lords? yes.
demands have been made from time to time in certain quarters
for strengthening and amending the anti-defection law, as contained in the
10th schedule to the constitution of india, on the ground that
these provisions have not been able to achieve the desired goal of checking defections.
the 10th schedule has also been criticized on the ground
that it allows bulk defections while declaring individual defections as illegal.
the provisions for exemption from disqualification in case of splits as provided
in paragraph three of the 10th schedule to the constitution as in-particular
come under severe criticism on account of it's destabilizing effect on the government.
please see this. please mark this.
the purpose of the amendment is that we will not allow you to
destabilize the government by bulk defection and that's exactly what has happened here.
so you have to interpret the tenth schedule and its provisions to ensure
that there is no bulk defection and the concept of minority is over.
bulk majority also will be subject to disqualification.
and one-third of it was a defense.
majority is not a defence anymore.
there is no defense as far as a split is concerned in the legislative party.
my lords paragraph two there, the committee on electoral reform, the dinesh
goswami committee, in its report of may 1990, the law commission of
india, and 170th report on reform of electoral laws 1999 of the
national commission to review the working of the constitution in its report
of 31st march 2002, have inter alia recommended omission of said paragraph
3 of the tenth schedule to the constitution
pertaining to exemption from disqualification in case of splits.
the ncrwc is also of the view that a defector should be
penalized for his actions by debarring him from holding any public office
as a minister in any other remunerative political post for at least
a duration of the remaining term of the existing legislature or until
the next fixed election, whichever is earlier, it is proposed to accept these suggestions.
mr. sibal, not with sending the deletion of paragraph three of the tenth schedule,
the issue is to who represents the political party is still a moot issue?
no. but that has to resolve outside the legislative party.
no my lords.
that cannot be still according to you resolved within the fold of the legislative party.
no my lords that question doesn't arise in this case.
may not be in this case. but that question as to who represents.
that will happen outside the house. that will happen outside the house.
that cannot be resolved by the number of legislators within the house.
that's my only submission my lord.
how that is resolved outside the house is actually
given in a judgment of this court in brahmananda reddy.
director of the internal constitution. that's right.
we have to call a meeting. you have to raise the issue.
for two and a half years, the gentleman was a minister.
the procedure, the bylaws of that party.
yes, yes you have to follow those bylaws, you have
to call a meeting, you have to resolve that issue.
and then you can do all this when paragraph 3 was there.
otherwise, my lords, what you do, what you're doing is exactly what the object says.
you shouldn't be allowed to do bulk defections.
toppling the government.
as i said, what what this would result if you were to uphold this.
my lords my humble submission.
if you were to uphold this, then any government can be toppled.
my lords for the simple reason you take those people become majority appoint
your speaker my lords and have a trust vote and you are in government.
you don't need anything else.
you do not need to have a split in the political party.
that's a matter of matter of dispute that
will arise and it will go to courts.
and the courts will decide in their own time.
in the meantime, the five years will pass.
so if you wanted to remedy this menace, you can't allow the
perpetuation of this menace by recognizing a split in the legislative party
as if there is a split in the political party which is
not even, which is not even addressed, which is not even claimed.
what is claimed is that we are the party.
now we are the party can't be claimed within the legislative party.
my lords for two and a half years.
i'm sorry. what two and a half years?
for two and a half years, he was a minister.
this very government never raised any issue.
there is no public document saying that he is
dissenting, or this is he is a conscientious objector, nothing.
no evidence. no document filed. no evidence of that.
no public statement, no newspaper report. nothing.
he was a leader of the house till 21st of
june and overnight my lords.the facts stare you in the face.
the only way my lords.this is not what parliament will be ready to do.
the only way to remedy this is to have a
five year period of no public post the moment you defect.
no minister, no public post, no public sector, no nothing.
all this will stop. that is the only way.
164(1)(b) now gives you a way out.
instead of defecting, you can resign and then you become minister.
you were a minister before, all you have to do is resign.
this is the only way.
if you want to maintain morality in public
life you will not be given any public office.
no governorship. no remunerative posts. kind of cooling off.
i'm sorry? cooling off of sorts. yes.
even in 361 my lords in fact disqualification for
appointment on remunerative political post, capital b my lords.
if he was disqualified, he can't hold a remunerative post.
actually 91st amendment my lords was very careful in trying to sort of settle part
of the problem, but one thing was clear they did not allow for bulk defections.
now my lords, paragraph 4 if i may read my lords of the tenth schedule.
4(1) my lords. i'm just waiting for.
your ladyship to.
a member of a house shall not be disqualified under subparagraph 1
of paragraph 2, where his original political party merges with another political
party and he claims that he and any other members of his
original political party have become members of such other political party, or,
as the case may be, of a new political party formed by such merger.
so my lords if the congress or if a small party in a state merges
with another big party to form a new party, that becomes his original political party.
therefore, a member of a house shall not be disqualified where
his original political party may be a small party merges with
another political party, and he claims that he and any other
members of original political parties have become members of such other political party.
that is they merge into that party or as
the case may be of a new political party.
both of them may form a new politics party formed by such merger.
so a merges with b or a and b
merged together to form c. form a new party.
so therefore no disqualification. it's a merger of the political party.
'or have not accepted the merger and opted to function as
a separate group.' so i say, look, i don't accept the merger.
there is no compulsion to merge. no compulsion.
i may be majority. i may be a minority within the legislature.
this will be called the unattached member?
uh yes.
no. but if he, if he has not merged, my lords,
he can form a separate, he will belong to the original.
supposing two parties merged and form a new party.
correct, my lords?
and he belongs to the original political party on which he
won the election he will continue to be the original political party.
i think amar singh sat like that.
amar singh yes. he will become the.
he will continue with the original political party
that also issue is before the larger bench.
the larger bench.
so if there's a new political party formed pursuant to merger, and
i belong to the original political party on the basis of which
i was elected, i continue to be in that original political party.
but clause 2 now again has (unclear) requirement.
at least two thirds of the existing members of the party.
i'm coming to that.
that's a very interesting provision which doesn't call for interpretation now,
but it has some nuances that's important for us to understand.
and from the time of such merger such other political party or new political
party or group, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the
political party to which he belongs, for the purposes of subparagraph 1 of paragraph
2 and to be his original political party for the purposes of this sub paragraph.
so from the time of such merger either to a party or
to a new political party he is deemed to be a member
of that political party to which he belongs for the purposes of subparagraph 1.
so may belong to that original political party and he has
dissociated himself or after merger he belongs to the other political party.
no issue. now comes the problem.
'for the purposes of subparagraph one of this paragraph, the merger of the original
political party of a member of a house shall be deemed to have taken
place if and only if not less than two-thirds of the members of the
legislative party concerned have agreed to such merger.' now my lords if two-thirds of
the members don't agree, then there is no
merger as far as the legislatures are concerned.
first, the merger takes place, then the question arises whether you are two-thirds or not.
if you are two-thirds and you agree, it is fine.
it is a defense.
if you are not, two-thirds, my lords, then you can be a separate group.
so two-thirds happens to be a defense after the merger.
this deemed is also very important. yes.
because what tenth schedule does is that it doesn't create a new category.
by saying deemed it is relating back to
the position of the assembly as it were.
when the people legislators got elected and come to the assembly.
that position will be deemed the instead of creating a new category.
correct.
for the purposes of one, the merger of the original political party of a
member of the house shall be deemed to have taken place only if not
less than two thirds of the member are concerned have agreed to such merger.
so two thirds of the member, less than two
thirds of members my lords question defense doesn't arrive.
but if two thirds of the members agree, then my lords, that's a defense.
that's a perfect defense.
so my lords looked at it from any standpoint,
these 40 people have no defense under the tenth schedule.
they don't claim that there's a merger.
they say that they are majority in the legislative party.
they claim that because of that majority, they can change the whip.
they claim that they can change the leader of the house.
they can call themselves, eknath shinde can call himself the
leader mainly because he happens to be one of 40.
and so what happens my lords to the political party to which he belongs?
what morality are we talking about?
what conscience my lords, conscientious objectives are we talking about?
'conscientious defectors' is the word that i used last time.
and you don't raise a voice for two
and a half years, you are the leader.
you enjoy the fruits of minister-ship, and suddenly you say that
- look, now, i am free to do what i want.
i can join up with the bjp.
i can go to guwahati or wherever i want to go to and that's it.
so the questions that your lordships will have to ask my lords
- how does the tenth schedule come to their aid at all?
under what provision of the tenth schedule can they have a defense?
the schedule doesn't give them a defense.
whether it's a minority bulk moving away or a majority moving away.
which is when we last time my lords were discussing this matter.
this is what i mentioned.
that the schedule doesn't, the 10th schedule doesn't make a distinction between majority and minority.
it just ensures that this habit of bulk defections, which
is destroying the polity of this country and by which governments.
elected governments can be.
the objective is that you should not allow an elected government to be overturned.
that's the fundamental premise on the basis of which paragraph 3 was deleted.
you cannot destabilize government and if you uphold such an act through
a judicial process you are enabling future defections and therefore destabilizing elected
governments which has far reaching consequences for the polity of this country.
that's the issue that your lordships have to decide.
yes. my lords paragraph 6 of the tenth schedule.
but my lords i'll take up the next topic tomorrow if your lordships don't mind.
the transcript which we have made today.
transcription will be cleaned up in the early part of the evening today.
and we will you give a copy so that you can have a look
at it if there is something you know, you can know what you argued.
you can know what you have argued.
that'd be wonderful. don't file an application for amendment.
thank you. appreciate it. i hope you continue to be well.
