my lord, this is about that automatic vacation of stay, my lords, not only in
criminal matters, but civil matters and across the board, my lords. yes, asian resurfacing. yes.
i need not place those judgments, my lords, the asian resurfacing, my lords, because in
the interim order your lordships have elaborated the contents and from a reading of the
first judgment itself, it appears that that was a case where the only question was
whether against an interlocutory order, an appeal could be filed, a revision could be filed
or article two twenty six, two twenty seven could be entertained.
that was in the context of pc act. there was no issue of any civil
proceedings arising in that.
there was no issue equally, my lord, what should be done with the interim orders,
of course it appears that in the course of arguments, the aspect of delay.
nobody can deny that proceedings are getting delayed in the high courts, especially in some
high courts like the allahabad high court and patna high court and so on.
and the delays are.
the judges also were.
that is what was weighing with them.
otherwise, stays just continue for decades to an end, particularly in the larger high courts.
and sometimes the delays are on account of the fact that the accused person would
get an interim order and that continues.
so, they take advantage of it, the trials get frustrated, witnesses.
long time lapse, my lords, the memories of the witnesses will fade.
in some cases my lords, the respondents, the state is the culprit, my lord. they
don't file affidavits promptly and sometimes also, especially in the courts which i have mentioned,
it is systemic fault.
fault itself could be for more than one reason, my lord, because there are one
hundred and sixty vacant posts in the high court of allahabad and only ninety judges.
filing is enormous.
filing is enormous matters don't get listed sometimes my lord, and sometimes when they're listed,
my lord, the judges are overloaded with work.
one hundred and fifty cases.
in allahabad, the problem is magnified that the same issue, whether justice oka was saying
in karnataka, i know that same issue in the larger high courts like mumbai. and
not the fault of judges or for that matter, the litigant, because if there are
two hundred matters on board every day, one hundred fifty matters, two hundred matters and
you have to write some reasons, give some order which shows deliberation, application of mind.
it's impossible for the entire to be completed.
and allahabad is compounded by the strikes.
the lawyers, my lord, i have the secretary, nitin sharma is here, who is this
instrumental filing.
in fact, my lord, a very sad episode happened.
and that goes back long time ago justice misra and justice mithal are aware.
absolutely. so, for months together the strikes used to go on, and at a drop
of hat.
no longer actually.
i don't think after two thousand and.
chief justice sodhi, my lord, was the person who.
despite so many judgements, i don't know why lawyers adopt this trade unionism tool.
so, it's not that once a while it happens.
it happens quite frequently and regularly, my lord. mister dwivedi, what is to be done,
then what is the solution?
because if a judge grants a stay in a four hundred and eighty two, it
virtually means that nothing is going to come up in the next.
the first question, which perhaps your lordships will have to look into is do we
find a solution, my lord, which is.
creates greater problem.
worse than.
which is worse than the disease.
it results in one more round, again.
we have to create in every discipline, civil, revisions, appeals and tax and a separate
bench, which will consider now the extension of same amount of time and the court
says in resurfacing, give reasons while extending which really means, my lord, that both sides
have to be heard.
it's not like that we're not able to take up, then we say extend it
till the next date automatically and that can happen in any court, my lord, even
in this court, it can happen.
it doesn't matter, for some reason, some important matter is going on, other matters are
not taken up, your lordship, normally ask, my lord, if any extension is required, it
is extended in the normal course.
so, the judges are not to be blamed.
they are making the best efforts, my lord, in the difficult circumstances.
granted interim relief after it was argued prima facie.
yes. so, when it comes up for extension, even if it's another bench, it's a
principle of judicial respect for the fact that even assuming that the stay has granted
by another bench, it has applied in mind.
yes. so, that's one important question, my lord, do we come out with some formula
etcetera., which in this matter, results in a vacation of a stay order with application
of mind and what is this formula, my lords, automatic.
neither, the supreme court is applying its mind because it's a kind of a judicial
legislation, automatic vacate for all cases, for all times.
so, because of this, the court is not.
this court is not applying its mind to the facts of that particular case, and
high court is also not applying and the second resurfacing which followed, this court directs
the magistrates that, 'you have to implement this, proceed'.
in some states, there are contempt petitions filed against the hon'ble judges because of the
direction that 'it is the responsibility of the concerned learned judge to proceed'.
some litigants, my lord, in punjab, haryana, in three or four states, contempt petitions are
filed, joining the hon'ble judges, the judges who were to conduct trial.
so, i join my learned friend, my lord. the solution, perhaps, is, my lord, more
severe than the disease.
we need to find out a solution, but this definitely is not the solution.
so, i submit that this automatic reservation is no solution.
neither practically nor on a legal plane.
what do you have to say about article two hundred and twenty six (three)?
that's what i. the first question is, that article two hundred and twenty six is
a basic feature of the constitution. if two hundred and twenty six (three) is to
be applied, then it will have to be tested whether that can be done.
if article two hundred and twenty six is part of the basic structure which this
court has repeatedly held, it is, so it cannot be taken away, it cannot be
whittled down, neither by constitutional amendment.
this is something like indira gandhi's case where, now by constitutional amendment, you are deciding
that it will get automatically vacated.
so who is applying the mind?
it is interference with the process of judicial review.
so, if challenged, it will be liable to be struck down.
but the high courts, in some cases which we have cited have, therefore, said that
this is directory.
bombay high court has also taken that.
madras high court. this provision came in by the forty fourth amendment?
yes. so, i think that's the best solution to leave it as directory.
otherwise we'll have to amend the petition and question two hundred and twenty six (three)
as ultra vires.
three hundred and sixty eight cannot be used to bring in a provision of this
nature but in a way, the direction in asia resurfacing, goes much beyond article two
twenty six (three).
two hundred and twenty six (three) says that, upon the making of an application by
the other side to vacate, if then it is not decided in fifteen days.
here it is not required.
the other side has to just sleep over for six months.
it'll get vacated.
so, technically, even if it is ex parte, after six months of stay, it would
be vacated.
in many cases, it has happened.
that's why in the second case this court went ahead logically to direct the magistrates
to proceed, implement.
the judgements are there before your lordships, perhaps this may also be necessary for your
lordships to consider in this with the constitution bench, whether two twenty six (three) is
mandatory or directory because there are diverse opinions among the various high courts. although judgments
are also there before your lordships, by way of a compilation filed by me.
that will result in widening of this court, my lord. maybe, but that will be
relevant thing also.
possibly that's not the question right now, two hundred and twenty six (three).
then we'll have to come with a petition questioning the validity of two hundred and
twenty six (three).
no, that's an interpretation of two hundred and twenty six (three).
no. mere interpretation.
then we'll like to challenge the validity.
but if it is to be interpreted, then it is directory.
and the high courts have given good reasons.
two high courts have given good reasons.
see the provision before the amendment, that is in the footnote to this scc, ebc
copy.
if you have the red book with you, you have this red one?
this earlier provision is in the footnote.
this is very good.
it gives all the footnotes.
mister dwivedi can read it from this book.
it's at page one hundred and eighty six.
the earlier provision said that if you have not.
for the redress of any injury referred to in subclause b or c of clause
one shall be entertained, if any other remedy for such redress.
that's alternate remedy.
or under law for time being enforced.
now see four and five.
no, interim order shall, whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other
manner shall be made in any proceedings relating to a petition under clause one, unless
copies of such petition and of all documents in support of plea for such interim
order are furnished to the party against whom such petition is filed or proposed to
be filed.
opportunity is given such party to be heard in.
that's fine, my lords. now see how five was.
five was very carefully framed.
the high court may dispense with the requirements of sub-clauses a, b of clause four
and make an interim order, in writing, that it is necessary so, to do, for
preventing any loss being caused to the petitioner which cannot be adequately compensated in money.
but any such interim order shall, if it is not vacated earlier, cease to have
effect on the expiry of the period of fourteen days from the date on which
it is made, unless the said requirements have been complied with before the expiry of
that period and high court has continued the operation of the interim order.
so that's.
the amendment which your lordship sees, which is now there.
see, this amendment will apply only when interim is granted without, without hearing.
so therefore, if there is a notice issued or in some high courts practice is
to serve state in advance, this will not apply at all.
a copy is given and notice is served, then this will not apply.
yes. we don't need to go into.
we will not go to two hundred and twenty six (three), my lords in this
matter, it operates in a different way.
and in very limited cases it will apply.
yes. because once a and b is complied with, then there is no question of
an automatic vacation.
in high courts, in most high courts. i'll tell your.
my lord, i would submit before your lordships why it's not necessary.
asian resurfacing essentially concentrates on stay of trials.
stay of trials would arise either in four hundred and eighty two or other jurisdiction.
two hundred and twenty seven. two hundred and twenty seven.
not in two hundred and twenty six.
two hundred and twenty six, my lord, we would be taking support to substantiate other
submissions, just to say my lords, that first it's a part of the constitution. here
it's a judicial continuing mandamus.
second, there is at least a requirement of an aggrieved party applied for vacating the
stay.
here.
automatic, without.
.
who is not vigilant enough and sits for six months is put to premium by
getting the stay against him vacated.
he has to do nothing, except being negligent, to put it a little harshly.
that's the position.
som two hundred and twenty six, may perhaps not require your lordships' attention in this
matter.
my lord, the copies are served in advance on the state council. absolutely. except in
private disputes.
otherwise, their state councils are always served and they have an opportunity of being heard.
it's other matter that the state government advocates may not have been having instructions, etcetera.,
so they get time, my lord. anything in particular that you would like to add?
my lord, only two or three things.
my lord, i have not stated.
alright, we'll hear you.
how would you like to summate the submission then, mister dwivedi?
i have seven points, my lord. seven points?
alright, just tell us.
one second.
the judgments are mentioned in my written submission.
i will not be taking your lordships through it.
the propositions are all well settled and well known to your lordships. first is that
this direction amounts.
which is that volume, mister dwivedi, your written submissions?
separate volume.
it's a separate volume.
high court bar. yes. they were allowed to intervene in the high court, my lords.
correct. the first submission is that this direction of automatic vacation is laying down of
a general norm.
direction for?
automatic vacation of interim order lays down a general norm and therefore, it is in
the nature of judicial legislation and this court, my lord, does not engage in judicial
legislation.
yes. in the same sex matter, my lord, your lordships have elaborated.
i don't need to, my lords. the second submission, my lord, that article two hundred
and twenty six is a part of the basic structure of the constitution and it
can neither be shut out or nor whittled nor whittled down either by constitutional amendment
or by legislation.
and ought not to be shut out or whittled down in exercise of powers under
article one hundred and forty one and one hundred and forty two.
this is also because my lord, the high court. this is the third point or
the second point?
third point.
third point.
it's part of the same point, my lord. alright. this is because the high court
enjoys a high constitution status and it's not subordinate, my lord, to the supreme court.
this also, has been held in several judgments.
so, merely because there is a problem arising, that doesn't mean that the power of
the high court should be curtailed.
and there should be any kind of a general direction that even if you have
not applied, even if you have not vacated, we are saying it will stand vacated
and even we will not apply our mind, it will get automatically vacated.
yes. so, the third point, therefore is, that the automatic vacation is neither hinged on
application of mind by the high court nor by the supreme court. and application of
mind is the essence of judicial decision making without which the decision would be arbitrary.
so, even though article fourteen, etcetera., fundamental rights are not available to test the judicial
dictums, yet, your lordships have consistently observed that arbitrariness in decision making is to be
avoided.
the fourth point is, the arbitrariness and the discriminatory character of this direction arises from
the fact that it lumps together all sorts of cases, civil, criminal, tax, irrespective of
facticity.
irrespective?
of facticity of the cases, nature of jurisdiction and determination of fault.
for if i am delaying, my lord, i, having obtained interim order twice, thrice.
i can understand high court vacates it, not by an automatic direction, but high court
vacates it because.
then, the next is, my lord, speedy trial includes early termination of vexatious trial, also.
and this direction does not reasonably balance the two aspects.
so, both section four hundred and eighty two and two hundred and twenty six are
available for quashing of firs and charge sheets and so, even charges in an appropriate
case.
so, one can understand that the court may be directed to be slow or to
give reasons or to hear.
so, these are three, four directions, which can be and should be rather introduced so
that straight away or maybe it can also be said that is, heinous crimes and
serious financial irregularities cases or economic offenses, if an interim order is to be given,
it should be initially for a short period, as your lordship says, till the next
date of listing.
so, that an opportunity, effective opportunity is there.
government counsel may not be having instructions so.
and that will not prevent the high court from granting appropriate relief.
the relief can vary.
sometimes it can be arrest, sometimes it can be staying the whole proceedings.
it all depends upon the circumstances.
because we have also seen that there are cases where matters have been settled up
to the supreme court and people still my lords, fight it out by filing firs.
they resort to criminal proceedings, civil nature disputes, they are all carried only to harass.
so, if in such cases a direction is given, till further orders.
all that power is there under two hundred and twenty six.
so, there has to be a proper balancing and some minimal directions alone should be
given so that there is a guidance to the high court. and lastly, this ignores
two precedents, my lords. though, in the context of trial and not interim order.
that is antulay's case and p. ramachandra rao. at page four of my written submission,
in paragraph four, i have given the paragraphs at the footnote.
i will stress only para eighty two, eighty three, eighty six, ninety three and ninety
four of antulay's case, that is (nineteen ninety two) one scc two hundred and twenty
five.
in your submissions, where is it, you said?
paragraph four, i'll very briefly state it, my lords. two constitution benches in ar antulay's
case and p. ramachandra rao have while dealing with the fundamental right to speedy trial
under article twenty one, held that it is not permissible for this court to fix
time limits for completion of trials.
the reason assigned is that delay in trial could happen for a variety of reasons.
may i read these two judgments.
no. it's a very well settled law.
p. ramachandra rao may be seen only, because after antulay's case came, three judgments of
this court, where this court identically, as in asian resurfacing, proceeded to say if trial
is not completed in three hundred sixty days, then trial will terminate.
so, the matter went back to p. ramachandra rao and they said that this is
judicial legislation.
it's in your convenience compilation?
yes, it is there in the compilation.
pdf thirteen ninety nine.
my lords, will find the reference.
the issue which was involved and that towards the middle your lordships will find raj
deo sharma one, two.
all these cases, they said, if not concluded, will terminate.
then, in paragraph nineteen, antulay's case is noted, and placitum f, if your lordship comes
to placitum f, there are other factors contributing to the delay at the trial.
so, all these various reasons for delays are noted and the court says, it's all
relative.
first is non availability of the counsel, non-availability of accused, interlocutory proceedings, other systemic delays.
in addition, court noted that in certain cases there may be a large number of
witnesses.
in some offences by their very nature, the evidence may be lengthy.
in kartar singh, another constitution bench opined that delay is dependent on the circumstances of
each case because reasons for delay will vary.
such as one delay in investigation on account of the widespread ramifications of the crime
and is designed network, either nationally or internationally.
the deliberate absence of witness or witnesses, crowded dockets on the file of the court,
etcetera.
so, all that is said, my lords. and then paragraph twenty, 'several cases coming to
our notice while hearing appeals, petitions and miscellaneous petitions such as for bail and quashing
of proceedings revealed, apart from inadequate judge strength, other factors contributing to the delay at
trial, generally speaking, these are absence of or delay in.
again, those reasons are mentioned.
and then twenty one, the question is posed, is it at all necessary to have
limitation bars terminating trial and proceedings?
is there no effective mechanism available for achieving the same end?
the criminal procedure code as it stands incorporates a few provisions to which resort can
be had for protecting the interest of accused and saving him from unreasonable prolixity or
laxity at the trial amounting to oppression'.
section three hundred and nine is then referred to, your lordships can then leave the
rest.
please come to twenty two.
legislation is that source of law which consists in the declaration of legal.
again, this definition of.
and then the court holds.
last line at page fourteen twenty one, 'bars of limitation, judicially engrafted are no doubt
meant to provide a solution to the aforementioned problems.
but a solution of this nature gives rise to greater problems, like scuttling.
a trial without adjudications, stultifying access to justice and giving easy exit from the solution,
from the portals of justice.
such general remedial measures cannot be said to be apt solutions.
for two reasons we hold that such bars of limitations are uncalled for, impermissible.
first because it tantamounts to impermissible legislation an activity beyond the power of the constitution
conferred on the judiciary. and secondly, because such bars of limitation fly in the face
of law laid down by the constitution bench in ar antulay's case.
therefore, run counter to doctrine of precedent'.
there's a quote from william wade, judicial activism and so on, i can leave it.
and then twenty seven, prescribing periods of limitation at the end of which the trial
court would be obliged to terminate the proceedings and necessarily grant, acquit or discharge the
accused and further making such directions applicable to all the cases in the present and
for the future amounts to legislation which, in our opinion, cannot be done by judicial
directives and within the arena of judicial lawmaking power available to the constitutional gods. howsoever
liberally we may interpret article thirty two, twenty one, one hundred forty one, one hundred
forty two of the constitution, the dividing line is but perceptible.
courts can declare the law, they can interpret the law, they can remove obvious lacuna
and fill the gaps, but they cannot entrench upon the field of legislation properly meant
for the legislature.
binding directions can be issued, for enforcing the law in appropriate directions may issue, including
laying down of time limits or chalking out a calendar for proceeding to redeem the
injustice done or for taking care of rights violated in a case, in a given
case or set of cases, depending on facts brought to the notice of the court.
this is permissible for the judiciary to do so, but it may not like the
legislative.
legislature, enact a provision, akin to or on the lines of chapter thirty six of
the code of criminal procedure, nineteen seventy three.
the other reason why the bars of limitation enacted in common cause, common cause minus
two, raj deo sharma minus one, raj deo sharma minus two cannot be sustained is
that these decisions though, two or three judge decisions run counter to the extent to
the dictum of the constitution bench in antulay's case.
therefore, cannot be said to be good law to the extent they are in breach
of the doctrine of precedents. the well settled principle of precedents, which are crystallized into
a rule of law.
now, that's known, my lords. and then, they affirm the directions, my lords, in paragraph
twenty nine.
so, my lords, it's somewhat similar.
these kind of directions are actually judicial legislations, something which even article three hundred and
sixty eight will not include within its fold.
yes. and that is, my lords. apart from these submissions.
what happens is in the course of it, my lord, that by issuing these directions,
we are not enabling the high courts to conduct themselves in appropriately, my lord, in
dealing with the case, but rather disabling them and downgrading their status, over the course
of years.
and in one such matter, in this court itself when chief justice khehar was, i
think vijay was there, was retiring there was some letter, my lord, from the law
minister, and regarding selections of judicial officers in the high courts and the rules to
be made and then the committee of judges of this court that accepted that proposition
favourably and immediately, a suo moto petition was listed and justice goel was chairman of
the committee also, and he sat on the bench also immediately.
and this was just a few days before the chief justice was retiring, the matter
went on for two days, and there were so many judges.
i said, how can you intervene?
how can you take over the power of the high court?
it was a very serious matter.
and ultimately, it's the second case where the bench was disbanded, after that kesavananda.
yes. just after the lunch, then he inquired, do you really think this requires serious
consideration and we must.
i said, don't be hasty in this matter.
for the last so many years, this has been continuing.
even if you want to change, please consider it carefully and then come out.
so, there is some kind of a tendency sometimes that we try to limit the
powers of the high courts. what we really need is that the high courts should
be getting on with their functions and discharging their duties and functions and powers under
the constitution more effectively.
i don't need to elaborate, your lordships are all more aware than me what is
happening in various high courts. but then these are not the solutions at all.
let's not curb the high court. the time is to rebuild the high court and
put them, my lord, on a strong footing so that high courts function like high
courts. they are ultimately.
there is some kind of.
of course, there's no such federalism in the judicial field as we have in the.
judiciary is structured differently, my lord. it has some various elements of unitary operations, but
at the same time the high court is the ultimate court in the state. eighty
or ninety percent of the litigants are not able to come to the supreme court.
now, therefore, we don't need to not keep on.
different methods have to be found.
able judges, less strikes, more lawyers because we don't have hearing.
i wonder what will happen after some time if the high courts are not having
final hearings.
we used to sit, when i was in law, first year, first day i used
to come and i heard the whole of kesavananda bharati and i used to sit
with the register behind.
so, by hearing, even in high courts, we have learned from the seniors how they
are arguing, how they are responding.
but today, what we are finding is less of arguments and interim orders.
people don't understand what happened in one case, what happened, why not in the other
case.
so, ultimately, that part somehow, in some way, has to be tackled.
unless the high courts are put on rails as constitutionally imagined by the framers of
the constitution, there will be dark days for this court my lord. ultimately, high courts
are the feeding source for this court, main feeding source.
so, let's put high court on the rails, strengthen them.
that's the only solution.
not this kind of stickling, my lord, that after.
somebody suggests that after three adjournments, it should be automatically vacated.
so, we are distrusting the high court judges.
all these propositions show that we don't have trust on the high court judges.
somehow we feel something wrong is happening there.
there's a similar provision actually, in the central excise act, or which was then dealt
with several high courts that there can't be an automatic vacation of stay merely because
the court is not able to apply its mind.
at page five, my lord, your lordships will find pepsi. that was read down, my
lord, by this court. at five page, pepsi. pepsi, my lord. that's right, pepsi. twenty
twenty one.
and surprising, my lords, i was surprised.
justice nariman went down that line, accepted that proposition.
he believes in basic structure.
and in this second case, at paragraph six of my written submission.
in pepsi, justice nariman himself said that.
diluted it, struck down portions of it, and said that only if there is fault
of the applicant, then it will stand automatically vacated, not otherwise.
so, he adopted the fault principle.
so, there are two problems.
one, the automatic vacation of stay prejudices a litigant, irrespective of the conduct of that
litigant.
because there are circumstances of which the litigant has no control and yet many times,
systemic flaws.
as a result of which, irrespective of what the litigant has in terms of infrastructure
available to him or her, stays are vacated by this logic.
and second the vacation.
the vacating of an order of stay, is also judicial act.
the vacating of an order of stay, is not an administrative act.
so, by directing that the stay will stand vacated, without application of mind, a judicial
order is enforced.
as a result of which, notwithstanding the fact that the earlier benches have applied it's
mind, given reasons for the interim order, applied it's.
there's judicial application of mind to what the prima facie merits of the case were.
subsequently, the stay is vacated without any application of mind.
normally, when we vacate an order of stay, you give reasons for vacating order of
stay.
maybe that the litigant had abused his.
you know.
abused that process or he had concealed facts from the court. and every day, we
are having appeals here against interim bails granted, bails granted and interim orders also people
are coming.
actually it amounts to withdrawing high court's jurisdiction.
taken away.
absolutely. it is actually, my lord, great distrust in the high court, which is reflected.
that's why i was compelled to make that those submissions.
great deference my lords. it's actually indicating distrust in the high court judges.
so, why are we having the high courts at all, my lords?
in fact, that's why many of us don't lay down outer time limits for the
high courts to decide cases.
in fact.
endeavour to do so and like that,my lords. and even when it is said, my
lords, in clear terms, yet your lordships consider it to be directory.
it's not that a judgment will be set aside merely because it has transgressed three
hundred and sixty five days and comes after three hundred and sixty seven days.
that's why i was compelled, my lords. these solutions, let's not find solutions, let the
high court have that full wide jurisdiction, which your lordships have said under two twenty
six.
ultimately, even this court will get clogged, if there are four benches extending orders every
time.
then there will be so many more slps coming in, your lordships precious time will
be involved in dealing with them.
power to grant interim order is.
this is the last, my lords. the power to grant interim order is inherent in
article two hundred and twenty six, two hundred and twenty seven and four hundred and
eighty two.
it doesn't stand outside it.
that is only to preserve and protect.
two hundred and eighty five my lords, the high court has dealt with this aspect
of interim orders, your lordships may just note two hundred and eighty five to two
hundred and eighty seven.
they have noted.
pdf three hundred and eleven.
in the same compilation or convenience compilation. or the and i must commend, my lord,
the judgment is very exhaustive, though a little bit lengthy, but it deals with a
high court dealing with a supreme court judgment, my lords, has to be careful with
all due care and.
a very well written judgment, my lords. thirteen of my written note, my lords, at
page seven in fazalullah khan versus akbar contractor. the question was whether this direction will
apply to interim orders granted by supreme court itself.
it will not apply to thirty two.
so, thirty two, two hundred and twenty six, ultimately, both are very important constitutional powers.
that observation is per incuriam because there was no such issue involved in that issue.
this was not an issue before the bench at all.
so, following what your lordships said in article three hundred and seventy case about prem
nath kaul's judgement.
i'll not take more than five, seven minutes, my lord. yes. i have filed an
intervention application.
if you don't mind, can i complete?
can i complete?
can we complete this side?
there is no side here.
there is no side.
there is no side really.
let the solicitor complete, then we'll hear you for five minutes.
i'll just summarize, my lord. for your lordship's convenience, i have made certain bullet points
which i had mailed today in the morning and i'm not going to read any
of them, at the outset, i may say.
my lord, my first respectful submission is that by a judicial mandamus or a continuing
mandamus, the judicial discretion of the high court cannot be curtailed.
i'm sorry.
your lordships, my lord, high court would be dealing either in two hundred and twenty
seven or four hundred and eighty two?
i'm sorry, my lord, today it is reversed, your lordships have physical copies and i
am not having.
but i am at fault, my lord. i'll invite your lordships attention only to few
points, my lord. my lord, suppose in a two twenty seven or a four hundred
eighty two jurisdiction, an accused approaches the court saying that there is no valid sanction,
high court is satisfied and high court says that, 'till the sanction is granted, trial
not to proceed.
the six month period, my lord, the judgment takes away the discretion of the high
court to say that the stay would inure a particular date, which is beyond the
reach of the applicant.
second, indore development authority, my lord, a recent judgment has recognized the principle of actus
curiae neminem gravabit.
your lordships are aware, of that 'act of the court can prejudice no one'.
yes. my lord, a somewhat similar situation was there under the new land acquisition act,
that period of five years from the stay granted by the high court was to
be excluded and court said that it's not in the litigant's hand when the stay
would be vacated, when it could be granted modified, etcetera.
so, my lord, that is my second point.
coming to page two of my note, there is a constitution bench judgment which asian
resurfacing misses to note that is raza buland sugar company versus municipal board, rampur. proposition
is simple in that judgment, that nothing can be done behind the back of, or
in absence of the litigant.
yes. my lord, on one hundred eightieth day, six months period, matter may be on
board, matter may not be on board, he would not be aware of.
and by operation of the direction, my lord, the stay would get vacated.
that is contrary to this constitution bench judgement.
my lord, at page two, i have cited one paragraph of sharif-ud-din versus abdul gani
lone, if your lordships can allow me to place it, para sixty nine, that is
in my respectful submission, fully applicable.
therefore, it is clear that if the condition imposed by the provision of law, this
was statutory law, this is continuing mandamus, to do a certain thing within a time
frame is upon an institution, and the consequences of that institution not complying with the
condition is to fall upon someone else, who have no control over the institution, which
is to perform the duty, then the provision of law cannot be construed as mandatory
but only directory.
here, the litigant has no control and even court has no control over his list.
the lists are beyond human potential.
next judgment is, my lord, pepsi food. my lord, there section two hundred and fifty
four.
yes. my lord, there was an amendment in the income tax act, section two hundred
and fifty four (two a), was inserted, that a stay granted by the tribunal would
get automatically vacated after one year.
and high court. this hon'ble court, said this, and this, i would respectfully place for
your lordships' consideration, such provision treats unequals equally.
yes. the person who has an interim order inuring in his favour, has once persuaded
the competent court to grant it.
the respondent has done nothing to get that vacated.
so, unequals are being treated as equals.
and therefore, also, this needs to.
this is not a correct law.
then next point is, whenever any court passes an order, it passes broadly strong prima
facie case, balance of convenience and irreparable injuries.
after six months whether those conditions, these three conditions, change or not, the judgment says
it stays vacated without any application of judicial mind.
because after six months, the case will not become weak, it would remain strong unless
heard.
balance of convenience also would not tilt within.
because, merely because six months have passed.
and injury also, my lord. yes. next point is, my lord, whenever the judgment which
mister dwivedi relied upon, i also respectfully rely upon.
but i'm not reading that judgment.
yes. whenever a time frame is to be stipulated, it is always for the competent
legislature to do.
but even those have been held to be by and large directory.
directory. for example, my lord. the ibc, insolvency and bankruptcy code. ibc or arbitration act.
the consumer protection act. consumer. after particular days, your right to file appeal goes, because
of the overall scheme of the act, the intent of the legislation, etcetera., etcetera.
because there is one focused area which the court is examining.
this is, my lord, too wide an area.
it can be a civil suit, it can be a criminal trial, it can be
criminal revision, it can be four hundred and eighty two, it can be civil revision
under one hundred fifteen, it can be superintendent's jurisdiction under article two twenty seven.
but nothing is considered, and a judicial mandamus is issued.
generally speaking, directions for the completion of a trial proceeding by the legislature within a
certain stipulated period is held to be directory.
but since an appeal is a creature of a statute, directions for the legislative prescriptions
for filing of appeals on limitation have been held to be mandatory, like in section
thirty four (three) of the arbitration act or section sixty one.
sixty one of the insolvency and bankruptcy code. the curtain falls.
you know.
you can condone a delay up to fifteen days, beyond thirty days, but no further.
because time is the essence of that particular legislation. so, time fixation, first of all,
has to be by the competent legislature.
and, for the purpose of the object which that particular act seeks to achieve.
it is always object specific.
then, my lord, your lordships are aware, order eight, rule one, required that unless you
file your written statement.
yes. the court can extend only for thirty days.
that came to be challenged.
i'll read, my lords, only four lines, when, my lord, this hon'ble court dealt with,
my lords, the challenge, that your lordships would find at page four, that the citation
is kailash versus nanhku, (two thousand five) four scc four hundred eighty, para twenty seven,
only last three lines.
that is relevant for the entire discussion.
but i don't wish to my lord, take time on that my lord, but last
three lines are crucial.
the object is to expedite the hearing and not to scuttle the same.
the process of justice may be speeded up and hurried, but the fairness, which is
a basic element of justice, cannot be permitted to be buried.
this kailash judgement, my lords, mister dwivedi was the amicus.
so, my lord, any judicial discretion, should be left, to the concerned court, namely the
high court and in some cases, my lords, the district court, but generally the question
of stay of trial does not arise in case of proceedings before the district court,
except in case of a criminal revision or some civil revision.
generally, it is high court. yes. so, my lord, while the problem is there, trials
are stayed and it has its own ramifications but this is not the solution.
these are my respectful.
thank you, mister solicitor. yes, mister hansaria. my lord, i appear in the ia number
two five eight four four zero of twenty twenty three on behalf of guwahati high
court bar association and we are supporting my lord, both mister dwivedi and the learned
solicitor, my lord. just to add one or two aspects.
my lord, wherever limitation is provided, it is upon the litigant.
your lordships, courts have put a fetter on the litigant.
section thirty four, arbitration act, appeal and not upon the courts, my lord. if your
lordships see the sweep of the directions in asian resurfacing, my lord, in the compilation
page twenty nine.
if i can read that, five lines from that judgment.
if your lordships go to the convenience compilation of mister dwivedi, the judgment started at
page three of the compilation.
at page twenty nine, just before paragraph thirty eight, your lordships would see this sweep.
what page will that be?
page twenty nine.
just before.
just starting, 'in all pending matters before the high courts'.
, my lords have got it?
yes. 'in all pending matters before the high courts or other courts, which will include
special courts, etcetera., relating to the pc act and all other civil or criminal cases,
where stay of proceedings in a pending trial is operating, stay will automatically lapse after
six months from today'.
the judgment is, my lord, delivered, 'unless extended by speaking order on the above parameters'.
now, next line is also important.
'same course may also be adopted by civil and criminal appellate revisional courts under the
jurisdiction of the high courts, the trial courts may, on expiry of the period, resume
the proceedings without waiting for further intimation' my lords. sweep of the direction dot your
lordships would see the consequence on a diligent litigant, my lord. he convinces the court,
passes an interim order.
thereafter, listed after one month, it does not reach or the respondent seeks an adjournment.
the court is not able to take it up, despite being on the board, i
wait for the entire day, it doesn't reach.
it happens in so many courts, both of.
all of the lordships knows so, my lord. so, my lord as the learned attorney
has rightly said that it is upon the institution, my lord, whether it is able
to decide it or within that six months’ time limit or not.
anything else?
only one thing, my lord. wherever the courts find that peremptory order is upon again
the judicial discretion.
sometimes, your lordships and courts pass it will operate for a period of six months
or my lord, four weeks.
that qualification is given in the order itself that this stay will operate for a
period of four weeks and it expires automatically.
that judicial discretion is available to the court, which this court in asian resurfacing. that
it automatically vacates, wherever the court wants, it should automatically vacate, that is stipulated in
the order itself, sometimes by your lordships, my lord, while exercising that discretion of the
court.
so, it cannot automatically vacate by virtue of this.
we do it so often over here, instead of saying, notice returnable in six weeks,
because if you say notice returnable after six weeks, sometimes we found that matters were
coming back after five years.
yes, my lord it has happened.
so, we list it on a particular day and say that the interim order will
be up to a particular day, so we have control over it.
we know that the petitioner will also come back here for extension of the order.
thereafter, also, sometimes it does not reach.
on that particular day, it is on board, it does not reach and the respondent
seeks an adjournment, circulates a letter and gets an adjournment after.
there are various circumstances.
alright. thank you.
i'm extremely grateful to your lordships. mister pai. we've got your note here. five zero
one dot one comma my lord.
i respectfully adopt all that my learned seniors before me have said.
only one or two things that i may want to add.
the genesis of my matter is a classic example of the problems with asian resurfacing.
this is a criminal trial, these are advocates, my lord, who appear for an accused,
they have been roped in as conspirators with the accused.
yes. i secured a stay in the high court in twenty fourteen, matter doesn't come
up.
the stay now stands vacated by the orders that i've impugned before your lordships, only
on the ground.
not on the ground that i'm seeking an adjournment, not on the ground of anything
else, not on the ground that the stay deserves to be vacated for a, b
or c reasons.
only the ground of asian resurfacing. only on the ground of asian resurfacing. yes. so,
my lord, most of it has already been said.
i'll just take a couple of minutes.
may i only point out, ultimately, judicial discretion is the essence of the adjudicatory process.
what asian resurfacing has done in effect, is completely, my lord, taken away that discretion
that the hon'ble high court has exercised or is to exercise in respect of giving
interim orders.
it's not that an interim order is not given without application of mind.
your lordships have already observed and others before me have already argued that the aspect
of application of mind is taken away.
what it also does, is dilutes the power of the high court under section four
hundred and eighty two as well as two hundred and twenty six.
yes. finally, my lord, i'll just put it all in the note.
i don't want to waste your lordships' time.
the basis for asian resurfacing, if your lordships see paragraph thirty six and thirty seven,
the basis for asian resurfacing is a judgment called imtiaz. yes. where, your lordships, my
lord, have discussed the delays in trials, etcetera.
there is really no reasoning, why asian resurfacing paragraph thirty six and thirty seven.
my lord, the intent is very good.
the intent, of course is to avoid delays in trials and promote speedy trials.
there can be no doubt about it, but there is no specific.
as mister dwivedi has already argued, never arose.
i'd like to end with what justice holmes said, life of the law is experience,
not logic.
asian resurfacing is probably logic, your lordships, my lord, five years of experience.
grateful, my lord. thank you, mister pai. my lord, mister mehrotra is appearing online.
if he may be permitted to address?
anything else mister mehrotra apart from what has been said?
please unmute yourself, you're not audible.
mister mehrotra, you're not audible.
you'll have to.
you're still muted, actually, at your end.
yes, now you are unmuted.
alright, you just set your house in order.
we'll hear mister nazki in the meantime.
my lord, i appear in mister pai's matter for the state of andhra pradesh. and
i completely support, mister pai in that.
my lord, just one addition.
what your lordships have done, my lord, in the judgment, is that you have also
imposed fetters, my lord, on the very exercise of jurisdiction, and i would only draw
your lordships attention to a constitution bench judgment of nineteen sixty four.
i have passed on the judgment.
it is air nineteen sixty four sc fifteen seventy three.
your lordship gajendragadkar speaking.
what is the name of the judgment?
my lord, the name of the judgment is b. rajagopala naidu versus state transport appellate
tribunal. my lord, here.
what is the para?
what para would you be referring to?
my lord, para nineteen would be relevant, my lord. i'm only drawing a parallel where,
my lord. we now request all members of the bar to start citing scr. scr
is now up to date, up to the last few days.
there is an scr citation also.
may i. and with neutral citations as well.
we would certainly do that, my lord. and now that the allahabad high court bar
association is before us, e-scr has now thirty thousand judgments in hindi. all judgments of
the supreme court since independence are being translated into hindi. it's in a searchable format.
so, exactly the facility which you have available on the english scr, you have in
the hindi scr. so, please spread the word and.
my lord, what is sought, my lord, to be done in this judgment, is that
by.
and this is being now extended to other indian languages, brother oka is very actively
monitoring that.
my lord, what was sought to be done, in this judgment, is by way of
a statute, my lord. a fetter was sought to be imposed, on how the quasi-judicial
authority would exercise jurisdiction.
my lord, that your lordships said is not permissible.
would your lordships have para nineteen my lord?
may i. how does it begin?
my lord, may i just pass on the hard copy?
no, we have it here, right in front of us.
you have it on your screen as well, all the lawyers.
you'll have it on your screen.
'in reaching the conclusion'.
yes, we got it.
that's the one, my lord. 'in reaching the conclusion, we have been influenced by certain
other considerations which are both relevant and material'.
now the relevant part.
'in interpreting section forty three (a), we think it would be legitimate to assume that
the legislature intended to respect the basic and elementary postulate of rule of law that
is, that in exercising their authority and in discharging quasi-judicial function, tribunals constituted under the
act must be left absolutely free to deal with the matter according to their best
judgment.
it is of essence.
it is of the essence of fair and objective administration of law, that decision of
the judge or the tribunal must be absolutely unfettered by the extraneous guidance by the
executive or administrative wing of the state. if the exercise of the discretion conferred on
the quasi-judicial tribunal, is controlled by such direction that forges fetters on the exercise of
quasi-judicial authority and the presence of such fetters would make the exercise of such authority
completely inconsistent with the well accepted notion of judicial process.
my lords, so.
yes. all right.
thank you.
my lord, just drawing a parallel.
anything else?
my lord, mister mehrotra, i don't know if he'll be able to.
mister mehrotra?
is someone appearing in person?
if your lordships can allow me to place.
yes, mister mehrotra. the problem still persists mister mehrotra. if you've filed your written submission,
we'll read them.
if you have filed your written submission, we'll read those.
alright. anybody else?
we're all done?
i just wanted to add one judgment, my lord, mithu versus punjab. your lordship will
recall, my lord, taking away of judicial discretion.
on the death penalty?
yes, death penalty, my lord. grateful.
