my lord's permission, may i mention a matter of nine judges.
my lord, this is the same matter that has to be listed before next week your lordship, .
the constitution bench where the nodal counsels, in that all the states were issued notice in october 2020.
till now, we have not been handed over any submissions from any of the parties.
only some of the private parties have filed.
we are unable to make . that's why states have not filed any return submissions, we will not dislocate the ?
we'll hear oral submission, we'll go in the traditional mode, but we'll not change the date.
this was an item number 4. we are also little caught on a way of weak accommodation might help us which of the other two in the middle 39, bombay and mueller said industrial dispute, that's how i'm not being technical about this article 39(b) et cetera.
property owners and property owners everybody ready in property owners, is everybody ready to go on with property that is notified from nobody.
in the first week it was mellowed at item.
next week is the last week before holi.
all right, then we will do this.
we can just be accommodation, a weak breather, that's all.
i'm all right. we list it, then on the tuesday after holi, he'll start industrial alcohol, we'll still go into the matter.
they should not then collect, the nodal counsel has mentioned the mentioned the matter state that none of the states have filed either their compilation or written submissions except for the state of uttar pradesh bearing in mind that instead of we direct the hearing before the nine-judge bench shall be adjourned to april 2024, immediately after the holy research was to enable all the states and other parties to file their compilation and written submissions.
really in the event that any of the parties, including the states, failed to do so, comma, the hearing of.
the hearing of the case shall proceed nevertheless on the date assigned and no adjournment shall be granted, immensely grateful submissions shall be.
thanks, shall be made available to the nodal counsel by today is the 14th.
we will say by the 28th. will that be all right for you?
to be 28th. they give it to you 28th?
i think should be fine. this order should be sent to all.
this copy of this order shall be supplied by the registrar judicial to all the standing counsel appearing for the respective states, of up is the main.
so, it matter rising out of your feet?
we have five impact all india and you are ready, mr. you are ready you'll be appearing for the oh, i see.
sometimes you also oppose the state of up upright actually.
so, centre and states, irrespective of this, the question of perceptions are different.
it won't take very long. this is unlike this matter.
it's not a very complicated benches of five constitution benches, from the 19 only synthetics is seven.
but your lordships, your lordship would never contain us if we are not irrelevant or repeating whatever always structures our children.
the matter may change sometimes. this matter comes and it's weird, but in this matter, we have given the list of those petroleum matters, can consider passing an order that in view of the mop you think you have downloaded, those matters may be detailed.
so, he has persuaded me without consideration we'll say that the secretary of mopng citing out the distinction, in this case without going into it, it's agreed on all counts that this should be detrimental.
the faculty in the ministry of petroleum and natural gas has as an affidavit ranking out the factual distinction with the legal description.
the distinction in this batch of cases from the batch which is being heard by the constitution bench by the nine judge benches.
mr... late mr. dusha. metal and it fills the general.
that was a big step this batch of cases may be detached, to be held separately appearing for state of assam.
state of assam, state that he has no objection to this course of action being followed without expressing any opinion on the submissions.
we have directed the proceedings be detached at the present stage in the above cases.
this act says you need to give the list of those.
how many are there how many are there?
totally india one more thing. since the lord mistaken india cements, 2014 previous three judgments, referred six questions, and then directed the district tag along with the mada case only one question is common royalty.
other questions are not really relevant here.
so, i'll make a note to your question number 3, which relates to nature of royalty, will be covered.
other issues will be taken up. later subsoil rights.
otherwise give us a small one. parameters before we rise, we'll pass that order.
should i give it tomorrow? so that will be done.
now i walked the note. i'll give.
actually, nothing needs to help because it will come up.
before the appropriate benches on royalty issues on subserve, right after our judgment is delivered, we'll see how much of it is covered by this.
so, we just simply retype it. in my power present on this civil appeal, numbers are given as a junior to just give a fresh just in two minutes.
ask somebody just proposition. where proposition without any argument, so that it can remain on that typographical error or that do not arise in future.
this was the state of the product it's the name of ghana.
shiva counsel or for the detective. given detecting, give it to court master proceedings we are not present for it just give back to as business does not test.
we'll give the ia number to the court must intervention application has been filed by ongc.
also, the matter has been given to oil man a rapid-fire mode.
are you in a test match mode as the umpire directs.
look tiny, precious we are also looking for a break now.
i think that alone has a beyond poly.
everybody even does a little bit we also get a little intellectual break doing more routine work for a week that's important finally notice.
happy hours for us we have been for six days.
a lot bearing the brunt of all the arrows fired from that side which were quite often fired at each other also tax.
some say not tax there is a mutual contradiction but not the typical happy hour now, one very witty question was put by hon’ble justice hrishikesh roy which was not answered and that was whether the queen said a share whether the queen.
yes, as you share in the mineral the answer is yes.
in fact, the large-scale mining which began in the world is on account of two queens not one the first was queen isabella of spain whom after the englishman, the spanish people succeeded in the reconquesta in 1492 when she was the queen.
and it was she who, granted a charter after obtaining a paper bull from the pope in rome to christopher columbus who then sailed across the atlantic with the objective of finding india.
there was some simultaneous dispute between portugal and spain.
then the king of portugal granted a similar charter to vasco da gama to sail eastwards to find an alternate route to india.
so that was the importance of india in 1492, and that is all because of the islamic wall, which suddenly spread across from morocco to the central asia.
columbus floods when he reaches an island in the new world which was america, he thought it was india.
and therefore, we find west indians and red indians and everybody.
so, india is all over the globe and those innocent people, my lord.
in the various trips he made, he saw them wearing gold, carry silver and that led to colonization and a massive, massive genocide.
the whole maya civilization disappeared. all those lands were captured for the sake of mines and minerals.
and isabella had a share abroad in that loot and genocide.
there is a book recently written by david canard, american holocaust and he rightly says that, what hitler did was nothing hundred times, note, what hitler did was done in the new world, america only for, basically for mines and mineral and plantations for working, which we are.
then having committed genocide then they transported mullet slaves from africa, that was the first queen, 1492.
but this transportation of silver and gold, the noble mineral from across the atlantic to spain, my lord, was disturbing the balance of power in europe.
spain was becoming richer so something had been done.
so, we had another queen and queen elizabeth to restore the balance.
to prevent strain, they created pirates. they were known as elizabethan, sea dock and francis drake is the most popular of the pirate, and their job was to loot this gold and silver.
the spanish ships were carrying to spain quite often.
the ship sets themselves used to be carried and that's how my lord, the european theatre transported itself into the atlantic.
the ocean began has seen of warfare and india was the centrepiece.
to find a route for india so the black gold led to these mines and minerals search in the new world.
so, what really? how it is pertinent?
actually, it is the land or native landowners who were alienated from the land not the mineral from the land, mineral from the land is extracted.
and after, only after extraction, it gets separated and decoupled until the extraction takes place.
there is no decoupling that's the story which history tells us the human being.
the natives were decoupled appropriately alienated completely from the landowners, and settlements were created there.
so, the englishmen who settled there and the spanish people who settled there, that is in the south of america to even today we find speak spanish.
so, the decoupling was, if i use the expression used by the other side, or rather better word alienation was of the landowner's native landowner, not the mineral, ipso facto gradually speaking, i think almost the entire south america, except for brazil, broadly in spanish.
yes. brazil, of course, is portuguese. portuguese.
portuguese and this genocide happened a lot when we read this, that these native people used to just walk up lovingly willow to the spanish people and the englishman will admit later on and they used to offer the gold blood because they were not doing that mass scale mining for them.
it was just the need embellishment wear it.
so, it was nothing to hand over a piece of gold.
it's very interesting reading that book that tells us completely how all this happened there but not going into the details.
so, this is the story of two queens, which is very pertinent and tells us that the alienation was of the landowner.
the only thing was that what genocide happened there did not happen in india, but there was a connection because when the britishers came here and the other european powers came to india then entire trade, which was happening in the initial days, that's during the mogul regime then the trade, they had nothing to offer.
they call themselves very civilized, highly developed, and india was nothing, no history, et cetera.
all those things but the history was such that they had to transport that gold and gold and silver to buy the products of india.
the cotton, the spices, the gems and other things.
so that's how much gold and direct connection.
even the roman times and later also times that was directly connected, but after the battle of plassey and when the lord clive captured and all those, then it was different than the cornwallis permanent settlement comes.
they were interested in revenue. what stopped then was that the gold and silver stopped coming and the revenue which they generated by this permanent settlement and the diwani rights which they possibly obtained from shah alam then, that was used to buy the products of india.
so, our own money was used for buying that and also for trading with the chinese, tea and other porcelain and other things.
so, the goal stopped the first mining lease is 1774 in india, which is by m/s sumner and heatly of east india company, but that was very small.
there was no demand as such in the country for the minerals as these kinds of minerals.
it is only when in 1853, when railways started, then they needed coal in mass scale and then more leases were granted.
so, it's really the period of the second half of 19th century and then, as has been stored to a lorchess load 1913 rules, mineral concession rule 1939.
and all those started coming as basically the two, world war i and world war ii will not put the pressure of more and more mining.
so, the british were interested in extracting more and more and using it for the war purposes.
all the economy was for the achlees from 30 to 47 was war oriented but one thing is very common that all throughout the people.
in india, the approach was different, and the people were not alienated from the land.
whoever owned the land they also were the owners of the mineral they were interested in revenue for which royalty, et cetera.
and the royalty is not a new concept today.
suddenly created knowledge by the frameworks of the constitution or by the mines and mineral act 1957 all through royalty and which was understood as a consideration which a return which is to be paid to the landowner for his rights in the land and the right or the minerals so the land and the mineral rights were stood club together just as clubbing this unified existence of land and minerals.
... must be noted, it's very important.
the minerals grow naturally in the womb of the earth.
it is said, my lord... i don't have a deep knowledge, but whatever i have read, that even when the animals and plants die, when microorganisms are created, which with the rainwater, percolate down into the earth and it takes hundreds of years for the mineral to form.
so, the formation of mineral is, which also they have said, that their ibm report says, it's a natural process.
so, it's naturally intertwined. it does not exist separately.
it is through the mining process, that it has to be excavated, extracted and then separated.
and in many cases, the soil itself is the mineral, silica; sand; clay.
the soil itself is mineral. through a natural process...
through a natural process in many cases, more than one mineral get aggregated, as in the case of granite.
granite is not a single mineral. more than one, they get intertwined form a rock, and that's how, my lord, the granite.
so therefore, this formation is a natural formation.
the question of the mineral lying separated or alienated or decoupled within the womb of the earth is not a phenomenon which exists in nature.
what can happen is, that the law, notionally, may treat some aspects differently.
it may notionally, provide that, and that notion became important, my lord, much later because many a times the landowners did not have the wherewithal to do the mining.
so, technology et cetera, as in technology grows.
so, the limited separation which occurred was that a landowner became entitled to grant a lease to some other person to have a right of occupation over that land, to do the mining over that land with all the mineralites, namely to extract and separate and then sell it.
now, this was a very, very valuable right of the landowner.
whether it was private or the state land in either case, it was a very valuable right.
and to say that the landowner, my lord, when he was charging royalty, then he was charging tax from the people.
individually the landowners... today, may be a different scenario, my lord, that bulk of the mining is being done on state land.
but there was a time, it was reverse.
the state land was less, and more my lord, the people were owning, the kings were owning.
one-third of india was indian states, state of princes.
so, there that state was owning. even after the independence, my lord, they continued to own much land in allahabad, in the shankargarh area, my lord, across the jamuna, about 25 km², is still in the possession of the erstwhile raja of shankargarh.
people still call him, my lord, raja.
so, it doesn't disappear from the mindset.
because they are getting the subleases from him and they carry out the mining.
so, the submission is, that the decoupling, et cetera, which has been contended for by mr. salve, is neither a natural phenomenon nor contemplated even today by the mines and mineral act.
your lordships, have seen section 4 of the mines and mineral act.
what does it say? it says, the state will grant the lease, and in a private person's case, the private person will grant the lease, but the format is prescribed.
slightly more liberal, in case of private person, some clauses don't apply, but otherwise it has to be substantially form k in both cases.
and the source of royalty is one in the same, section 9.
so, it will be, it will require some kind of, my lord, creating a sphinx or some kind of, strange kind of a body, my lord, where royalty under section 9 itself, in one case we call tax, in other case we call...
so, it is only under the lease...
the lease, which is granted under section 4 in form k, which entitles the lessee, whoever it is, whether central government is doing the mining or a private person or in shares.
this segregation, the separation or decoupling happens after extraction, payment of royalty and removal.
you can't remove. whether we collect it at the removal stage or a later stage, state government is given a discretion to provide a manner in which you will recover.
so, a state may say, that first pay and then the remove.
another state may say remove in our presence, we will note what you have removed, and then we will put.
but the liability to pay royalty is on removal and consumption, my lords, have seen that.
the submission is, that liability to pay royalty gets fixed, the moment you remove the mineral from the leased area.
in tax, my lords, a fixation of liability and its materialization, in the sense of recovery can be at different points.
does it get fixed on the extraction or does it get fixed on the removal stage?
removal. quantification is removal. and there is a rule which says, that before you are removing, weighing in fact, ensure that notice is given and the official of the state is present, so that the weighment is done in the presence.
thereafter, removal takes place. so, removal and consumption.
so, physically... physically, the mineral has now been separated.
it has been beneficiated and weighed, but the liability is under section 9 itself.
talks about? removal. towards removal...? consumption. and consumption.
yes. these are two key words in section 9.
that's right. and from the leased area.
from the leased area. kindly for a minute, my lord, turn to form k, that's the lease.
the book is same, it should be at page 125.
and please have the second page after the name of parties, "witnesseth..." no, kindly have from earlier page, "whereas the lessees have applied"...
the process of a contract begins, my lord, it may be a statutory contract, rigid, form prescribed, penalties, et cetera.
, that may be different thing, but unless somebody applies, so he is offering to take it.
"in accordance with the mineral concession rules 1960, for mining lease for in respect of lands described in part i of the schedule here under written, and has even deposited with the government the sum of rupees as security and the sum of rupees for meeting the preliminary expenses for a mining lease and whereas the government has approved the grant of lease." so, they offer an acceptance and grant has happened.
the order of grant is passed, then comes the execution of lease.
the applicant can, my lord, withdraw and walk away, say, i don't want the lease.
so, it's not that all discretions have been shut out, "witnesseth that in consideration of the rents and royalties, covenants and agreements by and in these presents and the schedule hereunder written reserved and contained and on the part of the lessee/lessees to be paid observed and performed, the state government hereby grants and demises unto the lessee/lessees. all those, the mines beds/veins, seams of...(here state the mineral or minerals) (hereinafter and in the schedule referred to as the said minerals) situated lying and being in or under the lands".
see, the coupling is still there. "...which are referred to in part i of the said schedule, together with the liberties, powers and privileges to be exercised or enjoyed in connection herewith which are mentioned in part ii of the said schedule, subject to the restrictions and conditions as to the exercise and enjoyment of such liberties, powers et cetera in part iii." and then it also talks of making of payments, et cetera.
and finally, at the bottom of that paragraph, "...and it is hereby mutually agreed between the parties hereto, in part ix..." lordship, got this sentence?
yes. so therefore, this lease as between the state government and the lessee is an agreement, it's a contract and the lease… and this is fixed by central government, their understanding, the form k is under the rules, rule 31 of the mineral concession rules, 1960.
so, the government of india's understanding, and i must say my lord, that both the learned attorney general and the learned solicitor general fairly stated my lord, that it's a consideration, not a tax.
and the form k, my lord, clearly talks of an agreement.
we may call it statutory agreement or whatever.
your lordships, have held in numerous judgments that even statutory contracts are contracts.
it's not that there is no scope for a meeting of mind.
there is an offer and acceptance, though in accordance with the statute's terms and conditions and forms.
now see, my lord, what all is being passed on.
part i, the area of the lease.
"all the tracts of land situated at so and so and so...", location is given, "...detail on the plan hereto annexed, north, south, the said lands." so, this lease involves the passing of the land also to the lessee to occupy and carry on the mining operations.
that's why it refers to 'rents'. yes.
then part ii, talks of "liberty and power at all times during the term, hereby demised to enter upon the said lands, to search for mine, bore, dig, drill for win, work, dress, process, convert, carry away and dispose of the minerals." this is the mineral rights.
the bundle of mineral rights. so, along with the land, the mineral rights, by the one and same document, under one and the same rule 31 and one and the same lease, under section 4 and royalty under, one and the same section 9.
all go together, intertwined. i'm leaving rest of the clauses, my lords.
we'll just elaborate on the mineral rights.
part iii then deals with 'restrictions and conditions as to the exercise of the liberties, powers and privileges in part ii'.
part iv is about 'the privileges reserved to the state government'.
the state government can, still go on the land to search for other minerals.
the lease is apropos particular mineral mentioned, but one may find some other mineral.
so, liberty has been reserved by the state, to make railways and roads.
part v is 'rents and royalties'. "provided that..." where the holder, the first clause 1, "...the lessee pays for every year except the first year of lease, dead rent as specified in clause (2) of this part. provided that, where the holder of such mining lease becomes liable under section 9 of the act, to pay royalty for any mineral removed or consumed by him or by his agent, manager, employee, contractor, sub-lessee from the leased area, he shall be liable to pay either such royalty or rent in respect of that area which is higher...".
this is a reflection of the proviso to section 9.
then, clause 2 says, 'dead rent as per third schedule'.
now my lord, the expression is 'dead rent'.
mr. singhvi argued that, dead rent is also tax.
and i can understand their predicament, if royalty is tax and you want to shut out 50 completely, then you have to logically go to the extent of saying that dead rent is also tax, surface rent is also tax, everything is tax.
just because of compulsion to pay; recovery; penalty; offense; four things.
then part vi. provisions relating to... one-minute mr. dwivedi.
clause 4 of part v, a separate rent is contemplated in respect of the land?
just see, clause (4), "the lessee..." "the lessee shall pay rent and water rate to the state government in respect of all parts of the surface", that is surface rent.
right. so, that is rent in respect of the land.
land. that is separately... separately paid. because you damage the surface.
that's rule 72. then part vi... one more, very important thing is, that the lessee does not become liable to pay royalty merely on the execution of the lease.
that's right. because liability to pay royalty arises under section 9, when you remove from the leased areas.
removal or consumption. because see the proviso to clause (1) "provided that, where the holder of such mining lease becomes liable under section 9 of the act..." "...to pay royalty for any minerals removed or consumed by him".
haan, the execution of the lease ipso facto does not make the lessee liable pay the royalty.
it's a payment which attaches... liability attaches when you remove or consume.
and even dead rent, he becomes liable if he doesn't work.
or if he works, but the production is so little that the royalty is higher than...
a royalty is less than dead rent.
royalty or dead rent. or dead rent, whichever is higher.
plus, rent you don't have to pay anyway.
if i work, but the extraction of minerals is so low, that i am not able to give them royalty more than the dead rent, then i'll give dead rent still.
so, the provisions of the law and the lease is clearly indicating the point of time, when the decoupling or alienation of mineral from the land happens.
there is no abstract notion created by either the constitution or the act or the rules or the form, to say that, my lord, at the time when the lease is being granted my lord, it stands separated.
it is the exercise of mineral right, which results in the segregation and separation.
lessee to specify, what type of mineral he intends to extract?
yes. if you see that... yes actually, that gets settled by exploration and earlier exercise.
123. he cannot extract anything other than what...?
no, no. if he finds, he has to report to the state government.
then either the state government gives him a further lease for that mineral, or the state will...
just come to page 137 of your...
137, my lords. yes, my lord. it is, part viii, 4, capital a. your lordships, are referring to particular clause of part?
yes. the page is different in my book.
yes. part viii, 4(a). 4(a). "the state government may, on an application made by the lessee, permit him to surrender one or more minerals from his lease, which is a group of minerals on the ground, that deposits of the minerals have since exhausted and depleted to such an extent that it is no longer possible to work the mineral economically. subject to the condition that the lessee makes an application for such surrender of mineral at least six months before the intended date of surrender, gives an undertaking." so, that is a surrender.
so, that's a case, my lords, where supposing a lease has been given, for more than one mineral and one gets exhausted, then he will have to...
otherwise we'd be charging dead rent, so he must comply with this.
to answer another part of brother pardiwala's question.
see, clause 1 at page 126, 'liberties of the state government'.
"liberty and power..." "...and the privileges reserved to the state government..." "...or any to lessee or persons authorized by it, in that behalf, to enter into and upon the land and to search for win, et cetera, et cetera, and carry away minerals other than the said minerals." yes.
so, the lease is for a specific mineral.
though, the state is entitled to enter upon the land for exploiting any other mineral.
yes. provided you cause damage to his right then you have to pay compensation.
yes. now, there is a form of the application in which the lessee, my lord, had moved the application, which is also prescribed, that is form i, probably at page 114.
form i, second page (vi). he has to specify "...the mineral or minerals which the applicant intends to mine." my lord, justice pardiwala has got this form?
which page? my lord form i. form i, clause 3 (vi).
what page was that? on 114 my lord, 116 maybe.
"minerals are minerals for which the applicant..." yes.
if you see part vi, provisions relating to 'rents and royalties'.
clause 1 says, that rent and royalties to be free from deduction, but clause 2 is very important.
"for the purpose of computing the said royalties, the lessee, lessee shall keep a correct account", now what follows is important, "...of the minerals produced and dispatched. the account as well as the weight of the mineral, minerals in stock or in the process of exports may be checked by an officer." so therefore, the liability to pay royalty...
so, that time he has to pay...
it's payable. the liability to pay royalty arises, when the decoupling has taken place.
yes. namely that the mineral has been extracted and at the point of removal.
yes. so that's the point of decoupling, not at the time of grant of lease, at the time the land is as such.
we transfer the land also to occupy.
unless we transfer the land, the lessee cannot do the mining.
the mining rights will be useless. so that, mineral rights and the lease of land go together.
and the lessee has to specify in the application, what minerals he wants to mine, the period, the extent, the details of the area.
so, he's making a conscious choice. and even with respect to period, the law says minimum 20, maximum 30.
so, there is a range of 20 to 30, between which, my lord, the applicant and the state government will have exercised that discretion and a bargain will be there to fix the period.
exact period, could be 25 in between.
so, it's not that contract is absent, my lord, in the case of state.
now what, next? mr. dwivedi, what justice pardiwala had just now mentioned about giving up, page 137.
yes, my lord. now, don't look at it so seriously, but when a miner goes down in order to extract the minerals for which he has already paid something and he finds a placard there, “queen isabela is already here’ or ‘was already here’ and he says, i give up the rights for...
yes, that's right. so, that was the first point which i was making, my lord that under the act, rules, forms.
the alienation or segregation, separation or decoupling of minerals from land happens upon exercise of the mineral rights post grant of lease.
again. take it again. the alienation, segregation or separation, which is the more appropriate term or the decoupling of mineral from land, happens under the 1957 act, rules and lease form k, only upon the exercise of mineral rights by the lessee and not at any prior point of time.
thus, the law is consistent with the natural phenomena of the minerals taking birth and acquiring shape in the womb of the earth.
and second my lord, the lease itself shows that one, this is a contract albeit statutory.
but the essential elements of contract, namely the making of application with an undertaking to comply with law, including payment of royalty.
and the acceptance of the application by a grant order under section 4.
along with execution of lease, which states that it is an agreement would show that the lessor and lessee have to agree to the terms.
right. more than this my lords, if the central government itself does the mining under section 17(3), it will have to pay royalty, dead rent, surface rent, at the same rate, at which is payable under section 9 of the act.
as if, the words are, "as if such, mining has been undertaken by private person".
this is a fiction created by central government, rather by the parliament itself that even central government, if it does, is treated to be a private person.
but we are told that, it's a relic of past.
so, when form k is executed, is it a grant of a mineral right?
along with the land, the mineral rights are also granted.
but for the lease, section 4 says 'there will be no mining except under the lease'.
so, the mineral rights are transferred. they belong to the state, they are transferred.
i can do mining myself. that the state can do it itself.
reserve it. earlier, my lord, till introduction of 17(a), that is 10th february, 1987.
the state government needed no approval of the central government.
17(a). but after this, under 17(a) the state government, if it wants to reserve under 17(a)(2), so now, we need approval of central government, but up to '87 no approval was required. we could say that we will do the mining under our own corporation, ourselves. now section 17(3), when it says that central government will pay royalty as a private person, it is acknowledging that the land and the mineral belongs to the state and that is why, agrees to pay royalty. it is not agreeing to pay tax to the state. it takes a lease in the same manner. therefore, you pay the royalty in the same manner. there are only two ways in which the state government can be deprived. the first is, either the constitution itself provides that the land and mineral will vest in the union, that is article 279. that is regarding the 'economic shelf', there's 'economic zone'.
the numbers were reversed, my lord. 297.
that's one way. the second way is, acquire the land by means of an acquisition act by law, referring with respect to entry 42, list iii.
and in fact, if your lordship, looks at article 31(a)(e), even private rights existing leases, the rights can be extinguished by law.
which then will be protected, if it is under 31(a) protected from challenge based on article 14 etc. "notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law providing for e..." in fact, a and e can be read together.
"the acquisition by the state of any estate or of any rights therein, or extinguishment or modification of any such rights." and then e, "extinguishment or modification of any rights accruing by virtue of any agreement, lease or license for the purpose of searching for or winning any mineral or mineral oil or the premature termination or cancellation of any such agreement, lease or license." a farm, a huge farm of 100 acres.
100 acres. and i come to know that in some part of my farm there are minerals.
i cannot start extracting those minerals on my own because minerals, not of my ownership.
still, there has to be a lease deed, right?
so, lease deed will be only with respect to extraction or removal of the minerals.
land belongs to me. and if your lordships are having out the...
yourself, you want to do the mining yourself, then of course it will be relating to permission to excavate.
royalty has to be paid because i am removing it, removing the minerals so that's the notion my lord that minerals always belong to the sovereign and the state.
can you just read section 17(3) again, mr dwivedi?
section? 17(3). 17(3), yes. "where in exercise of the powers conferred by subsection 1(a) or section 2, the central government or the state government, as the case may be, undertakes prospecting or mining operations in any area in which the minerals vest in private person. it shall be liable to pay prospecting fee royalty, surface rent or dead rent, as the case may be from time to time at the same rate at which it would have been payable under this act. if such prospecting or mining operations had been undertaken by a private person." this is 17a(3).
your lordship wants me to read, 17(3)?
17(3). "wherein exercise of powers conferred by subsection 2, the central government undertakes reconnaissance, prospecting or mining operations in any area, the central government shall be liable to pay reconnaissance permit fee or prospecting fee, royalty, surface rent or dead rent, as the case may be, at the same rate at which it would have been payable under this act. if such reconnaissance, prospecting or mining operations had been undertaken by a private person under a mineral concession." now until the actual extraction takes place or removal, as this statute uses the word, is it possible, of course, that the right to the surface of the land vests in one person, and the rights to the mineral vests in another person.
that's also possible? it depends on the terms of the lease my lord, what is being...
no, even before, forget the fact that there is a lease, can there be a situation where the surface rights vests in a and the right to minerals vests in somebody else?
for instance, service rights vests in the private person and the right to minerals vests in the state?
no, it will go with the land.
they are the right of the landowner.
so, unless by law or by contract a notional separation is brought about in the two my lord it won't happen.
yes. before i leave this, your lordship may just have one more clause of form k which is the last clause 9, of part ix, page 141.
begins at 137. you are saying part ix, right?
part ix. clause 9. the last clause.
clause 9. "for the purpose of stamp duty. the anticipated royalty from the demised land is so and so per year." sorry, for the interjection, my lord.
chief justice's question. kindly look at section 24a(2).
24? 24a(2). you might get an answer.
this is the question which from my lord justice pardiwala, with a surface, right of somebody.
mineral right with somebody else. 24a has nothing to do with that one.
section 24a doesn't answer that. well, because if the law contemplates a situation where the title to the surface vests in a and the right to mineral vests in b. then, does the law then not provide for an artificial decoupling even prior to removal.
it's not my submission that by constitutional amendment or by parliamentary law since the power of regulation is with them under entry 54.
whereas to see to what extent they want to provide.
so, there will be some stray cases, if at all my lord, where because of joint family or something.
they divide amongst themselves that some part goes there, some part goes to somebody else which is very unlikely situation and perhaps my lord, may not be very helpful in answering the controversy, which is your lordships, are considering.
and so far as 24a is concerned, it's only a case where a private person's land if somebody is...
same as 24a that holder of lease will pay to the owner of surface.
these will apply only where a private person is having a land which is having mineral and then some third person wants to do the mining on that then lease is granted by state government under section 4, but surface right, therefore surface rent is to be paid to private person.
that's all it's saying. just come forth.
do you want to add this one sentence without affecting mr. dwivedi's, because we have almost come...
this was considered by the supreme court in the tarkeshwar, i was mentioning at that time.
considering the halsbury's laws of england, specifically saying that both can be held the place.
but normally the presumption is that, everything up to the centre of the earth, including mines and minerals, vest in a person who is the owner of the surface.
but there should be a legislation. to take away the mineral.
that's what mr dwivedi also said. this is a fundamental...
that... the judgment is... yes. please give us a citation.
it is tarkeshwar... i will cite that judgment.
you're citing. then, it's okay. mr. dwivedi is going to cite it.
mr. dwivedi, don't forget this, when you are...
yes. so, your lordships have seen that stamp duty.
yes, we saw that. it's a different entry, but royalty is the measure.
i will elaborate on this aspect when i again come back to the constitution, the submission would be that the mineral value is not the sole preserve of entry 50 list ii.
stamp duty, the law itself contemplates royalty as a measure.
and if your lordships will look at entry 54 list ii sales tax as it existed before gst, before the 101st constitutional amendment 2016.
it was sale of tax on sale of goods.
so, mineral would have fallen there and states have been recovering under sales tax act, and it's the sale price.
so, the entire mineral value is a measure in sales tax also.
yeah. if it's a declared goods, minerals is declared goods, then central government will fix a certain rate.
ceiling will be there. that's the limitation.
constitution has given enough indication the framers as to what is limitation and i had referred to 86(3) also in that connection.
that was section 15 of the central sales tax act.
i'm grateful. it's not blocked by a prolix and expansive search all over the places like searching a needle in the haystack my lord and then come out that this is tax occupied field.
so occupied field has nothing to do with this.
the central the parliament does not occupy the field of taxation.
it's a limited concept. as my lord, said justice nagarathna my lord that you can extract everything from 23 but there also, to the extent.
yes, it's not subsilentio. parliament by law, provide extent.
not state government, not by rules, not by forms.
so, the 4% will come from section 15, but mineral value, the sale price of the mineral value will be its basis.
and not only state tax, my lords, parliamentary tax also.
excise duty if they want to levy on the production of minerals, which they are levying, it will be based on the mineral value.
if you want to import, impose export duty under customs duty, again, it will be based on mineral value.
so, there's no such thing my lord that other tax entries cannot be at all have a measure which is connected with mineral value.
it's not the sole preserve of entry 50 list ii.
my lord that mineral value, the measure based on mineral value is not the sole preserve of entry 50 list ii.
measure based… measure based on? mineral value or a portion of mineral value.
how else a capacity of land can be salvaged; a capacity of land should be...
how do we determine the capacity of land?
same extent of land of same nature lying in noida will have one value, coming back to delhi my lord its location, its use, what the master plan is permitting, the moment you turn a lease land, a residential land into a commercial land the same land value will go up.
so, the capacity of land depends on what it can produce, where is it located, what is the permissible use.
here the permissible use is mining for the mineral which is lying in the belly of the earth.
so, stamp duty erstwhile as the sales tax stood and even today oil, still there.
under 54, a sales tax is still being levied on oil, crude oil, and also on variations, gas.
and it is based on sale price of those items.
and similarly in the central act, that is excise duty, customs duty, tax on capital assets, all of them will be based on this.
so merely because you find that we have imposed a tax on land based on mineral value or half of mineral value, my lords this also must be decided my lord, assuming i'm wrong in this and your lordships doesn't agree, that mineral value as a whole can be used.
why can't my lord a part of it be used, let's say as orissa has done, percentage of half of the mineral value.
so, land's worth has to be determined in some way.
why can't we say 25% of the mineral value?
and if it is still disrupting some national policy or something my lord, there can be a dialogue, after all states have voluntarily united to create a union.
article 1 says india that is bharat is a union of states.
so, union and states have to gel together, they can't afford to all the time, despite the politics which is conflicting and introduces an element of conflict, but cooperation is also there, has to be there.
so, if there is some such situation arising my lord, that government of india feels that their whole economy will go bust and there will be disaster, et cetera my lord, i don't think any state, possibly my lord will be saying no to reduction of tax or to grant a holiday of tax.
what are we witnessing around? should we close our eyes my lord to what the states are doing towards the industrialists.
red carpet my lords. they can walk into the chambers of the government my lord anytime.
it's the common man who can't walk.
the chapprasi will stop him my lord, 'appointment hai ke nahi? but they can, just a phone call and they will be escorted into the interior chambers. my lord i'm not casting a, that's the capitalist phenomena which is all over the globe.
not here alone. so, they can always walk there my lords.
in fact, these companies are themselves competent to my lord pressurize the government to reduce the taxes.
we can't do it. anyway, parliament has the power to impose limitations.
yes, that's on one tax. one may same my lord that all right, you can get out of this and then go into 49.
go into stamp duty. this argument of 300%, 500% at one point of time in 1990s, the figures have been given by the learned solicitor general that 300, 500, because the royalties, et cetera, were very low and therefore they needed revenue and therefore.
but today, no state is a revenue.
the affidavit is silent on one very vital aspect post kesoram at least in west bengal for the last 20 years this tax is being levied.
what disaster has happened. should not the government of india tell your lordship, that this west bengal tax has caused what impact.
has it burnt the economy? has it prevented any obstacles for export import?
in any case if state tax is high royalty can be anytime reduced by the government.
yes embargo is on increasing the royalty that can be done only once in three years.
reducing it it can be reduced anytime.
government of india has more than one power to tackle a situation of disaster.
so let this not be a subterfuge to bang the states.
state of west bengal is levying tax on mineral rights as upheld in kesoram for 20 years.
what is the proportion of that tax to the total.
how is it impacting that's the real test, we say the proof of putting is in the eating.
here is a tax, which is being levied for 20 years.
why don't you analyse that and tell the court to what disaster is happening.
are we to hallucinate some disaster just the moment the state touches rs.1 per.
jharkhand says one and a half rupee per square meter for land.
no mineral value and is lying stayed here, struck down by the high court based on these series of cases based on para34.
what is nothing to do with mineral value.
what disaster would have happened? the employees have not been paid their salary for four years.
the tax is not a return it's not a consideration itself a compulsion.
that's not a complete analysis, compulsion penalty or this.
it's a recovery of amount to be spent by the state for its own needs and for welfare activities, not to give you back something.
but the structures, the construct of mr salve's submission was reduced, avoid the word tax, use exaction.
so, it's an exaction for return. look at the essence of entry 50.
it is also an exaction for return.
so, bring it on the same plane and then it's a limitation.
that's how we read down one tax on mineral rights as becoming something which is a return for mineral rights.
compensatory tax the losses after great effort have been able to avoid compensatory tax in entry tax matter.
at least four constitution benches and one seven judge bench your lordships overruled and everybody agreed it can't be compensatory tax because compensatory tax means it's a fee.
there are exceptions to that. yeah. so having knockdown compensatory tax in context of part 13.
now we introduce compensatory tax entry 50 itself.
so, unless it becomes compensatory, it can't be equated.
it cannot be a limitation. these are the strange methods by which we alter the innate character of royalty.
please see one more article in the constitution.
this 294 and the purpose of showing this is that my right to land and mineral lying underneath in its belly is not a gift of mines and mineral regulation and development act.
the parliamentary act can regulate it but unless it acquires all...
294. 294. all the provinces, state provinces under all property and assets which, immediately before such commencement, were vested in his majesty for the purpose of the government or of the dominion of india and all property and assets which immediately before such commencement, were vested.
in his majesty for the purpose of government of each governor's province shall vest respectively in the union and corresponding state, only the continental shelf was taken out.
so, the erstwhile ownership transferred to province we continue to be the owner of the land and mineral and whatever is subsequently acquired by the states under land reforms act, under the abolition of kingships.
my lords, kindly have volume 1(c). volume 1(c), volume 1(c) which is a rejoinder submission.
volume 1(c) i think you have covered the, four of your submissions.
yes. at page 7. your lordships have that?
my lord the chief justice? yes. my lords at the bottom i have done nothing but repeated what your lordships, sutras, as mr. singhvi said, kindly come to page 8.
i have also mentioned entry 13, where more than one sutras are involved.
page 8, which? para 4. if your lordship looks at entry 23 and 27 and 67 of list i. entry 27 of list i, right?
or at list 2, sorry. 23 of list i. highways declared by or under law.
please mark this. i'm drawing a distinction between entries which say, by law, by parliament, by law, or those which say by or under law.
that will create a structural problem with respect to section 9 being understood as a tax.
which entry were you saying? list i. 23, highways declared by or under law made by parliament and then 27 odds declared by or under law made by parliament or existing law to be major ports including the delimitation and constitution and powers of port authorities.
and then 67. ancient and historical monuments and records in archaeological sites and remains declared by or under law made by parliament.
perhaps your lordships will notice a box there.
declared, earlier it was declared by law but by constitution 7th amendment act, 1956, it was altered.
at the foot of that book your lordships should see that earlier.
now entry 12 of list ii. libraries, museums and other similar institutions controlled or financed by the state.
ancient and historical monuments and records other than those declared by or under law made by parliament, is reflection of that amendment is here also.
and then entry 40 of list iii.
archaeological sites and remains other than those declared by or under law made by parliament to be of national importance.
now compare this with entry 54, 52, 53 and 54 of list i. regulation and development of oil fields and mineral oil resources, petroleum and petroleum products industries.
the control of which the union is declared by parliament by law.
parliament has to do this exercise by its law, and it cannot empower a delegate to make the requisite declaration or to lay down the extent.
that could be by a notification, if it is under law.
because one legislature is dealing with another legislature.
the central legislature vis-a-vis with the state legislature.
so central legislature has to do it.
it can't say that i'm delegating this power to the government or some other authority or officer of the government to lay down limitations.
now 53 also, in the field, in the area of oil fields and mineral oil declared by parliament by law to be dangerously inflammable.
so, no government or officer can say, i will declare it, or i will declare in part and leave it rest to the government to declare.
54 also mines and minerals to the extent to which such regulation, development under control of union is declared by parliament by law.
parliament also cannot say that well, i have made the law section 2, is there now rest will be laid down by rules, as was earlier done in 1948 act.
it did nothing but said rules will be made.
that was constituent assembly. but now that the constitution is in force, it has to be done by parliament, by law, so by law, you have to provide the extent, if you want to alter, reduce or increase a tax or a limitation or a different kind of limitation has to be by law, but my learned friends have been taking your lordships to the rules, the forms, and all those stipulation, because it is general principle is, that delegated exercise is considered to be.....
62, 63, 64. yes. there are other entries also.
56 is also there. under law. even article...
entry 56. yes, entry 56. i'm grateful.
56 also. 63. 64. 64. no, but this doesn't mean that everything has to be specified by the law.
the extent of the control by union has to be declared by the law.
once the extent of the control is specified in the matter of parliament, then, of course, the rule making power can supplement it.
integrities and minor details may come by rules and forms.
right. i'm not saying that the form must come in the act itself.
declaration cannot be by a declaration. declaration can't be and the extent of declaration.
right. parliament, your lordships, have ruled in case, that if parliament cannot say that section 2, i have brought in, now rest is to be done by government.
so what minerals you are.... the important aspects of the declaration, because you are extracting from 23.
you are depriving the state legislature of its competence.
that's the crucial thing. and that's why it says to the extent, and even where entry 52 did not use the word to the extent, in ishwari khetan's judgment your lordship's constitution bench has said that we will read in that word.
some meaning has to be given to the word 'extent of' because you are extracting, depriving, denuding.
it can't be sub silentio. some nitty details can come in, the form can be prescribed.
many other things can be done. how you will recover royalty, how you will recover surface rent, all that can be done by rules.
but under entry 52, the control of the entire industry which is declared is with the parliament.
parliament. unlike 54. it is... 54 is only to the extent to which it is declared.
my lords right. but in ishwari khetan's, your lordship, said that even those words are missing in 52....
so, they read it down. but we will read it.
that condition? yes, if required, i can show that, in ishwari khetan, i'll show.
for the moment, this distinction, which i am pointing out has relevance to understanding the limit of limitation in entry 50.
entry 50 list ii says any limitation imposed by parliament, by law, not by or under law.
also, the extent to which is only in the context of regulation of minds and mineral development.
your lordships is right. the words are missing.
the words are missing in 52. my lords are right, absolutely right.
not but in ishwari khetan, if i may give, this judgment is in volume...
so, really speaking, entry 50 of list ii makes it that the limitation has to be by law of parliament.
yes. second that law is again to the contained of law is qualified by saying it has to be a law relating to regulation and development of...
yes. so, the major aspects, the major policy aspects of the law must come by the law, they can't leave that to delegates.
that is paragraph 11 of ishwari khetan which is in volume 5 (a) and the citation is 1980, volume 4, scc 136; 1980, volume 4, scc 136.
paragraph is devoted... so, one thing is equally clear that you have to also possibly concede, ms. bhatti yesterday made just one sentence, but it is a very succinct sentence which she used, that the power of the state in regard to taxation is eclipsed not by a taxing legislation of the union, but by a regulatory legislation of the union.
that's right. no difficulty my lords. with this statement i have no quarrel my lord, but i have a quarrel with the use of the word 'eclipse'.
it is subjective and therefore.... normally eclipse word my lord, a doctrine of eclipse that was deployed by lordships under when existing law under 372 my lord is found to be violated.
you have to apply that, article 13.
so, it was valid when made. was it still gone or was it only under a cloud and the cloud lifted.
and once again, if you go to the nature my lord an eclipse happens when something covers, the lunar eclipse or the solar eclipse my lord, some other object comes in between.
the law mmrd act cannot come in between, cannot extract, cannot usurp, cannot arrogate.
the relationship of 54 list i to 23 list 1 is of one character and the relationship of entry 54 and entry 50, list ii, is of another character.
can you just wait for us, hold your thought there, just for a moment.
could you please repeat it? yes, my lord.
the relationship between entry 54, list i and entry 23 list i, entry 23 of list ii is of one character, namely, you can abstract, denude it as much as you want, as much as parliament wants.
and the relationship between entry 54 list i and entry 50 list ii is of another kind and character, which does not permit abstraction, only limitation.
my lord justice nagarathna has noted this ishwari khetan citation.
yes. para 11. hypothetically my lords, assume my lord that instead of the same expression was there in entry 23 as in entry 50 instead of subject to, subject to limitation, would it remain identical, or would it bring about a substantial change in the nature of the relationship?
in that case, then even the regulation will always be exercised by the state.
so therefore, when the learned additional solicitor general states that entry 54 list i being a regulatory power can limit.
i have no quarrel. limitations can be imposed but if it is said when she says that this eclipses, then there is a problem.
stricto sensu the doctrine of eclipse has propounded is for a different purpose where either the competence is lacking or some other constitutional provision is being violated by an existing law, then, but let's forget that technicality and go by the literal expression.
even then, something should come in between.
the only thing that can come in between is a limitation.
so, the power of limitation has its limits.
so please discover the limit of limitation.
it's not unlimited. otherwise, the easiest thing was to accept shri brajeshwar prasad's request to transfer entry 50 list to list i. the easiest thing, if you can eclipse, then take it.
i have already placed that. every debate which happens on constitution necessarily goes across the seas.
the ship sail to the house of commons debate was read out to your lordship.
it's no different mr percy can be substituted by mr. prasad.
what he was wanting. mr. prasad was wanting and on both occasions that was not accepted.
that's the key important thing. in a debate, in an assembly where constitutions are being framed, speakers says so many things.
ultimately what is being accepted and rejected is the important thing.
so, both in the house of commons and here although they were paramount sovereign could do anything.
brajeshwar prasad part. can you just tell me which volume?
volume 4a page 16 starts at page 10.
mr. dwivedi your junior is a walking encyclopaedia.
we have noticed this in repeated constitution benches.
the last time we allowed her to make that submission in the constitution bench today also, we are going to hear her after you have concluded for five minutes.
she is well armed today, my lords.
she's probably anticipated what's coming. volume 4a?
volume 4a, page 7 to 16, your lordships, and the relevant is at page 60.
with regard to entry 50 and with regard to entry 54 is at page 10 and 12.
just come again, please tell us? volume 4a and the debate starts at page 7 your lordships.
so far as entry 54 is concerned page 10 and 12 and entry 50 is page 16.
yes. another way of saying occupied field, nothing else.
the principle of occupied field is completely unrelated to the relationship between 54 and 50, can't occupy the field.
occupy the field. just to probe you a little bit on this.
what kind of limitations would entry 50 contemplate?
would these be limitations contained in the law relating to mines and mineral development, of an express nature, on the taxing power?
or could it be something more than just the....
that's one way of reading it, that you read the word 'limitations' in a very narrow sense, because you are carving out of the ...
competence. competence of the states. that's one approach, but does it have to be an express limitation on the taxing power itself under entry 50?
so, one my lord relying, if i have to rely on a judgment, then 9 judges judgment in jindal, your lordship, said it has to be expressed.
all constitutional limitations must be expressly stated, either in the constitution or the law, that's one.
second my lord the framers of the constitution have...
in what context? i think both... n. v. ramana...
in our judgment, we referred to that, i think.
yes. judgment of the chief justice thakur.
also, my lords, that was in the context of 304(b) which requires that if it is reasonable restriction, then you have to refer to the president for ascent, so the contention was that if every tax law is to be placed before the president, it being violative of 301, then all fiscal federalism is gone.
so, my lord, the chief justice, my lord, you handled the issue in a slightly different way.
your lordship said that under 301, all taxes are not impediments.
so, the people who are challenging but they must produce enough material to show that it is an impedimental free flow of trade, whereas the chief justice thakur said that it can't be a restriction.
that was a divergence. but at the end of the day, unanimously the taxing power was disentangled from the grip of 3 and 4 (b), so that the states are free now.
that's, in fact a very important aspect.
thats para 28 of chief justice thakur's judgment.
that's 2017 12 scc, page 1, it's in volume v, at page 2937.
the discussion begins at page 28 under the caption, 'constitutional limitations must be expressed' at 3074.
volume v, right? 3074. may i please read?
just a second. the power to levy taxes.
just only one second. "the power to levy taxes, being a sovereign power controlled only by constitution, any limitation on that power must be expressed. that proposition is well settled by the decisions of this court in umeg singh and others versus state of bombay and from bansidhar ramsuk das versus state of rajasthan in umeg singh case, this court stated the legal position in the following words, 'the legislative competence of the state legislatures can only be circumscribed by express prohibitions contained in the constitution itself, and unless and until there is any provision in the constitution expressly prohibiting legislation, on the subject, either absolutely or conditionally. there is no fetter or limitation on the plenary powers, which the state legislature enjoys to legislate on the topics enumerated in the list ii and list iii of the schedule of the constitution. the fetter or limitation upon the legislative power of the state, which had plenary powers of legislation within ambit of legislative heads specified in list ii and iii of the seven schedule to the constitution could only be imposed by the constitution itself and not by any obligation'. here one can substitute parliament under entry 50. and not by any obligation which had been undertaken by either the dominion or the province of bombay or even the state of bombay. under article 246, state legislature was invested with the power to legislate on topics enumerated in list ii and iii of the constitution, and this power was by virtue of article 245(1) subject to the provisions of constitution. the constitution itself laid down the fetter's limitations on this power. for example, in 303-286(2), but unless and until the court came to the conclusion that the constitution itself had expressly prohibited legislation on the subject either absolutely or conditionally, the power of the state legislature to enact legislation within its legislative competence was plenary. once the topic of legislation was comprised within any of the entries in the list ii and iii of seventh schedule to the constitution, the fetter or limitation on legislative power had to be found within the constitution itself. and if there was no such fetter or limitation to be found, the state legislature had full competence to enact the impugned act no matter whether such enactment was contrary to the guarantee given or obligation undertaken by the dominion. again, in bansidhar, this court reiterated the legal position. it is well established that parliament or the state legislatures are competent to enact law altering the terms and conditions of previous contract or of a grant which, under the liability of government of india or of the state government arises. the legislative competence of parliament or state legislature can only be self-circumscribed by express prohibition contained in the constitution itself. and unless and until there is any provision in the constitution expressly prohibiting legislation on the subject, either absolutely or conditionally, there is no fetter or limitation on the plenary powers which the legislature is endowed for legislating on the topics enumerated in the relevant lists. i think that's good enough. yes. so, this goes on. i'm not reading my lords. no. then it goes on to part 13. yes. justice bhanumathi is… paragraph, my lord… judgment paragraph is para 281 and justice ramanna is para 185. but the only difference will be that under entry 50, parliament can impose limitation, but must do so expressly. my lord, what is there i don't understand my lord, what is the hesitation? parliament knows its policies. industrial policy, mines and mineral policy, everything. they know the export, import, the need of fdi and so on and so many things. but what prevents them my lord from having one provision and saying that. just look at 276. article 276. i've already referred to article 286(3). 276 is yet another provision where framers have indicated how they understand this limitation. taxes on profession, straits, colleagues and employments, notwithstanding anything in article 246, no law of legislature of state relating to taxes for the benefit of the state or of a municipality, district board, local board or local authority therein in respect of profession, state colleges or employment shall be invalid on the ground that it relates to tax on income. the total amount payable in respect of any one person to the state or one municipality, district board, local board or authority in the state by way of taxes so and so shall not exceed rs. 2500 per annum. so, the framers where they found that the measures are overlapping and they wanted to protect it instead of eliminating it, they allowed it and said, here is the limit. so, there is ample indication in 276 and 286(3) read with the central sales tax act. so why should not the parliament analyse everything? look at the operation of west bengal. by affidavits we can't create my lord a doomsday. all state legislatures are responsible, 300% 500%. my lord, what prevents the parliament, supposing the pi five say the parliament imposes 500%, 300%, that is after. it can be said vice versa to that also. but we don't say that. we assume that they will act with constitutional responsibility. at one time in india, we had a 97, 97% tax on income coupled with the wealth tax. in fact, the real rate of taxation went up to 103%. 103%. so sometimes the taxes are also imposed to control the exports. we don't want a mineral to be exported, we'll say 100%. so, nobody will export and sell here, so there are... but parliament knows all these things. the finance ministry knows, the commerce ministry knows. they can all deliberate and say that here is this. don't impose it more than this. don't impose on royalty. mohit mineral case, your lordships, my lord, the chief justice has mohit mineral, your lordships have talked about fiscal federation federalism. yes. what is the citation of mohit mineral? 2022 10 scc page 700. at which para? para 50, 52. in fact, it begins at paragraph 47 to 58, where your lordship held that state governments are not bound by the recommendation of the counsel, it's only recommendatory. and this principle was up to para 59. mr. dwivedi, you have incorporated it in your written submissions? yes, i have. you may just read that paragraph. we have five minutes to go before we close for lunch. para 10. para 10, is it? para 10. which volume? 1 (c). 1 (c). your lordship on the judgment, from the written note? from your written note, 1(c) you have quoted paragraph 56. and 171.1.2. page 11 of your notes? yes. para 10. recently this hon’ble court in union of india versus m/s mohit minerals while holding that fiscal federalism is one of the important features of indian federalism, held that the recommendations of gst counsel cannot be held to be binding on the legislature. to regard them as binding addicts, would disrupt physical fiscal federalism, where both union and state are given equal power to legislate on gst. one of the important features of indian federalism is fiscal federalism. a reading of the statement of objects and reasons of the 2014 amendment bill, the parliamentary reports in speeches in indicate that article 246(a)and 279(a) were introduced with the objective of enhancing cooperative federalism and harmony between the states and the centre. however, the centre has a one third vote share in the gst council. this, coupled with the absence of the repugnancy provision in article 246(a) indicates that recommendations of the gst council cannot be binding. such an interpretation would be contrary to the objective of introducing the gst regime and would also dislodge the fine balance on which indian federalism rest. therefore, the argument that if the recommendations of gst council are not binding, then the entire structure of gst would crumble, does not hold water. such a reading of the provisions of the constitution diminishes the role of gst council as a constitutional body form to arrive at decisions by collaboration in contestation of ideas. neither does article 279 (a) begin with a non obstante clause, nor does article 246(a) state that it is subject to the provisions of article 279(a). parliament and state legislature possesses simultaneous power to legislate on gst. article 246(a) does not envisage a repugnancy provision to resolve the inconsistency between the central and the state laws on gst. the recommendations of the gst counsel are the product of a collaborative dialogue involving the union and the states. they are recommendatory in nature. to regard them as binding addicts would disrupt fiscal federalism, where both the union states are conferred equal power to legislate on gst. it is not imperative that one of the federal unit, units must always possess a higher share in the power for federal units to make decisions. indian federalism is a dialogue between cooperative and uncooperative federalism, where the federal units are at liberty to use different means of persuasion, ranging from collaboration to contestation. so, although the context is the gst in parallel power, but ultimately my lord, the whole trend of this court's journey with regard to federalism begins with kesavananda where your lordship recognize it is a basic feature. bommai... then bommai and then itc versus agriculture. four cases where lordships have held that, where there is lack of clarity, ambiguity, et cetera, then tilt in favour of protecting the state's niggardly power rather than by interpretation, by some legal subterfuge, dilute it, reduce it, or obliterate it, that's the principle. and not only there we are witnessing today my lord the conflicts between the state. howsoever we may avoid this, the conflict where the governors holding the files, your lordship said you cannot, orders were passed for premature release, governor was not signing. then in periyapalayam's case, the lordship said that no, you have no authority in that regard. in so many spheres article 356 itself your lordship strictly construed the earlier laws were all overruled and a new law was laid down. so, the whole journey of this court is to protect the state and the surest will, way of killing the states, the federalism is to squeeze and strangulate the fiscal power. my lord, my learned friend is finishing now. there are a number of new points he has made because, frankly you opened, we really opened the case, he has answered. there are a number of points he has made on decoupling. i'm not finishing. just hold on. oh, you're continuing after lunch. i'm so sorry. i thought you were finishing at 1pm. alternate benches. discharge. we'll discharge the alternate benches. i'm sorry. my mistake. i was told you're finishing at 1. my lords, your lordships may give me five minutes on federalism my lord. well said in principle. my lord there are some important points my learned friend has made, including on mmdr. all right. you can give us a small note. i don't think it's for you, mr. dwivedi, it's for the court to decide. may i suggest my lord after he finishes give us half an hour. don't be so stern, i'm just on a lighter vein. all right, we'll come back. give us 30 minutes my lord at the end.  yes. if i may quickly show some more aspects of the mmrd act. yes, there are four situations. one where state government grants a lease to a private person or to a government company…  and person will include juristic entity. the second situation is where the central government reserves land that's 17(3), section 17(3). the third situation envisaged is, where both either central or state government decides to undertake mining in a private person’s land that is 17a(3)... either central government or the state government undertakes... ...undertakes mining or prospecting, et cetera in a private person’s land. and the fourth situation howsoever rare it may be, envisaged in chapter vi of the minor mineral concession rules, 1960 that is where the minerals are vest in partly in the government and partly in private persons. now, these distinctions are significant for respondent to mr. salve's argument that in the case of private persons it's a contract, in the case of state government it is purely statutory, no contract. i've already answered that there is a contract there. but see, chapter vi of the mc rules, where partly, minerals vest partly in government and partly in private persons. rule 53 at page 76. 'provisions of chapter iii and iv shall apply in relation to grant of prospecting license and mining leases in respect of minor... in respect of minerals, which vest partly in government and partly in....' chapter iii and iv, all include, up to rule 40(g), that is rule 31 and form k. so, completely at par. but, once royalty, dead rent, et cetera, is obtained, then it's divided as per share. yes. so, there's no difference between a state granting lease and where this situation, the fourth situation is existing. and even in the situation where, private party completely... where the minerals vest only in the private person, that is chapter v, rule 45. that will be the fifth thing. chapter v, which, according to me, was the third situation. the chapter v heading shows that 'minerals vest in a person other than the government.' now, rule 45 provides for the condition of mining lease here also, except that there is a certain relaxation. 'every mining lease shall be subject to the following conditions. the provisions of clauses (b) to (l) and (p) to (u) of sub-rule 1 of rule 27 apply to such leases with modification, that in clauses (c) and (d) for the word 'state government' the word 'lessor' shall be substituted. mining operations shall be undertaken in accordance with mining plan.' so, all those things are required here also. they can't.... there also, you can't avoid the mining plan. now the only thing is that there can be some other ancillary conditions imposed by agreement in that. but, the main thrust of the conditions in rule 27 are applicable here also. yes. and sub-rule (iv) says - 'if the lessee makes any default in payment of royalty as required, by section 9...' so, section 9 is straight away applied here. and rule 49 prohibits premium. so, the range of restrictions, conditions, et cetera. are here also statutory, except for a slight relaxation. in essence, it's also a statutory contract. yes. and all these four situations, the royalty source is section 9. source of dead rent is 9a. and importantly, section 15 allows the state to fix the royalty for minor minerals. yes. so, one of the submissions from the respondent was that -'if it is a case of section 15, then it will be consideration. but if it is this, it will not be...' so, one and the same concept, derived from one in the same source section 9 or.... section 9 will not apply to minor minerals. not to minor minerals. my lords are right. it doesn't apply. but the nature of royalty is identical. only determination of royalty is left to the state government. yes. authority is different. so, the characters will not differ from situation to situation. it was also said that 9(b) and (c), mr. singhvi said that all of them are tax. some others said, mr. singhvi said 9(c) is not tax. it's a fee, he said. 9(b) is tax. 9(b) and (c) and c my lords there is the hardly any difference. in fact, in both of them involved a quid pro quo quite apart from the fact that a royalty does not come to the state government. in one case it goes to dmf, other case to nmet. and both have specific purpose. in one case it is exploration, and the other case it is rectification of the damage caused to the area affected by mining, or the people. so, yes, this is one extra source for enabling relief to the people who have suffered there. but ultimately both of them are portion of a royalty and put in a separate fund for a specific purpose. so, whether we did not enter into a controversy whether it is in the nature, essentially a fee or, but even tax can be sometimes put in a separate fund for a specific purpose. so, irrespective of this, it's a separate quantum. it's nothing to do with something coming to the state government. so, this can't be a limitation to entry 50, list ii. you can't club 9, 9(a), 9(b), 9(c), and all of them, bundle them together and say that these constitute a limitation, impliedly. now, one other submission of mr. salve was - apply the principle... now, the other principle invoked was generalia specialibus non derogant. entry 50 is special entry. 49 is general. therefore entry 50 will not be, so nobody says what is... the argument was that since the constitution has bifurcated between taxes on land and taxes on mineral rights, taxes on mineral rights cannot be subsumed in taxes on land and buildings. but nobody has, we have not argued that it is subsumed there. there are two different aspects. one is what we contend is, as i said earlier also that the measure based on mineral value is not the sole preserve of 50. right. as long as the minerals have a direct proximate nexus with any other, for example sales tax is based on it, but it is a sale tax. it has to be per necessity based on a sale price. excise duty. it has to be based on the point of sale. and even bombay tyres, which they relied, actually helps us when it says that excise duty can even include the cost of packaging. they say, it doesn't matter as long as the excise duty is tax on manufacture, you can have a suitable modification and you can contour your measures accordingly and add something here and there. so, that's not our contention that tax on land is a tax on mineral rights. what they want to assert actually is, that we are actually using a constitutional subterfuge or trying to a colourable exercise of power. as in the guise of taxing land and buildings. we are doing that. mineral rights. that's right. so as to be liberated from the limitations which were imposed on you. this kind of a contention has been repeatedly raised and rejected by this court that if in case in the context of income, rr engineering was a case where the haisiyat tax, the circumstances tax based on income. yes. your lordships said that one is in 62 others, list ii and other will be in the tax on capital asset is an aggregate. so as long as individually the tax is right. for the incidents should be falling on the field which is contemplated. if the tax is on land and the measure is not remote, not far removed, it is valid. so, in order to sustain the respondent's submission your lordships will have to hold then that the measure based on mineral value is the sole preserve. then obviously other entries cannot. then obviously even sales tax cannot use it. stamp duty cannot be levied on that. but every day the registrations of transfer of property is being done on the based on the value of the property. and this is important aspect because what happens is that sometimes this court will be limiting itself to saying that this particular measure is not available, struck down and we stop there. some other measure is adopted. then again there is a challenge. so, the state must know clearly, what are the measures which are available for imposing a tax on land? how should it be imposed? cess and royalty is struck down. so, if we say, all right, this is a tax relatable to half of the mineral value. so where should we stop? should we say a quarter, after all mineral value emerging from the land has some direct relation with it and some basis. it can be made a basis. some as part of it can be made a basis. now, since orissa is not going for the whole of the mineral value is saying that x not more than 20% of half of the mineral value. can we do that? now, they say leave it to the smaller benches to decide. so once again matter rebounds back. we can't take the full mineral value. we can't take the half mineral value. we can't take the quarter mineral value. so where do we stop? how do we determine the capacity of the land? but one thing is very clear, the tax on mineral rights does not include mineral bearing land. in fact, some of the learned counsels on the other side said even minerals are out. it is only mineral right. even here you can't take the mineral value. you just take the document of lease like stamp duty but they forget that stamp duty here also takes the mineral value, the value of the land. so therefore, the state must be clearly told, because who... otherwise will be every time doing something, every time my lord there will be a challenge. that look, there's some connection with mineral land and mineral value. and for the last 20 years, the states are not able to, other states apart from bengal not able to collect. this is lack of uniformity in fact. one state is collecting and for 20 years neither the central government nor parliament has written to the state of west bengal that you limit this tax to this. that was the best test. they could have told bengal that this is high, leading to disaster. please limit it. make it half. make it 25%. these are all limitations which are permissible under entry 50. they can say limitation means that ensure that the tax or some factor that etr rate or something which they have suggested it should not go beyond this. just on a point of information. since my learned friend mentioned west bengal, west bengal is deprived of the enhanced rate of royalty that was allowed in 1991, post amendment. we don't want enhanced reality. we want our reserve. it's a question of competence, not the amount you are depriving or not depriving, assigning or not assigning. it's a question of federalism. the state must exist and state must enjoy the plenary power. if you want to limit, limit it. if you can deny something, deny it. even limitation is denying. but this is significant, that non issuance of any directive, not including any provision with respect to state of west bengal shows that the government is satisfied that the tax which is being levied and collected for the last 20 years is appropriate and causing no disaster. 20 years is not a small period. two decades. so therefore, this principle of 'general and special', when does it apply? when there's... the special provision must traverse the same genus, the same field. there is a general provision which covers a particular field. then comes a narrower provision, which covers part of it. then you exclude it from the general. but if the two fields, if the two taxing events, the two taxing objects are different, now, here is the contradiction in their article. mr. salve says, "there's a neat division, no overlapping.
" and this is what sundararamier also says. whether we call it aspect theory, whether we call it neat division or whether we use taxable event and taxable objects to delineate the distinction, once the division is neat, then where is the question and where is the scope for applying this principle of generalia specialibus non derogant. they are 2 independent taxing fields with a different taxing objects or taxable events. and as the other side concedes, there is no overlapping, neat division, different aspects. so, there is no scope for application. this will apply in cases, for example, i may just give an illustration, where your lordships, in several cases have applied. they have cited some cases, but they are traversing the same field, which is not possible in tax entries. kindly look at entry 24 list ii. 'industries subject to the provisions of entry 7 and 52 in list i.' just below is 'gas and gas works.' so, in the case of 7 and 52, the moment a declaration is made by parliament... by law. ...the entire subject is taken away. those industries go out of the fold of entry 24. because they are subject to the provisions of... that's right. now, the issue arose in this court whether 25 will go... calcutta gas company case, 1962, volume v, page 209. 'it was held that union by law under entry 52 cannot extract the scope of entry 25.' this is a case of special being carved out from industries. because one particular industry is separately mentioned. so, the field is same. 25 is... 24 is industry, 25 is  and the relationship of entry 24, 26, 27, my lord, the chief justice has dealt with in that case of rera of west bengal and followed tikaramji and all those cases. so, the structure of the relationship, see, how the relationship of 24 with 52 drastically differs from 23 with 54. because once the union declares under entry 52, industry goes to the list i. but 26, 27 send the trade and commerce, production, supply, distribution of goods to list 33, list iii. in mines and minerals both shift… the mines, mineral both shift to list i. but in case of industries, industry goes there, product supply, distribution, trade, commerce, all shift to 33. my lords have noticed all this in rera case. so, these structural differences demonstrate a different kind of interrelationship. rera was a very interesting case, because there the west bengal legislature enacted an act identical to rera. identical to rera in all. there's no conflict as such, that one says x and the other says counter x. so mr. dwivedi appearing for the west bengal government, there is a conflict. because we have done exactly what the centre has done. so, where is the bar on us, a very interesting here. no other case has raised that issue really. this is the only case. this is the only case which dealt with that. and since all these entries had been dealt by, there was itc and all those constitution benches, so i said, i will not defend that. but this was a solitary argument left. but very correctly held by your lordships, that these theories will not apply in case of taxations because there is no overlap, they are distinct, either divided by taxable event by taxable objects, division is neat. i accept what mr. salve says. it's neat. but if it is neat, then where is the question of extracting from here or there? we have just to see that particular entry and see is the tax actually in that field and is the measure having a nexus. what do you mean by... you can address it in your own turn. what do you mean by tax on mineral rights? i mean, how do we sort of conceptualize what is meant by tax and mineral rights? it's a tax on the aggregate of mineral rights. just like your lordship held in case of tax on capital assets... on the aggregate of the assets. aggregate of all the assets. s c navan and then dhillon of course, yes. that is entry 80... 86. 86. 86, i think. taxes on the capital value of the assets. exclusive one asset is excluded, agricultural land. so, when it says tax on mineral rights, it's a bundle of rights which always goes with the lease. the land is given for working there, mining operations and the rights are you can enter. your lordship notice that rule and the clause in the lease itself which says you can enter, you can drill, you can excavate, you can beneficiate, so all those things which you are doing in the leased areas including the right to extract and sell, that's the sum total of the right. because simply extracting and not selling is hardly any right, then. but when you tax royalty as a state, are you taxing mineral rights then? so, royalty, nobody is taxing now. right. all the laws of all the states, including the west bengal, which has been upheld in kesoram, expressly excludes all taxes and royalty. that is because of india cement. kesoram has not attempted to indirectly overrule. it only said that, that related to cess on royalty, a particular. taking a cue from that that we can't tax on royalty. all the states changed. they took the mineral value minus excise duty, minus sale tax, minus this, minus royalty. so, no state is taxing or having any component even of royalty. so, there is no royalty in it, of royalty. although i personally feel that cess on royalty, striking down was wrong because royalty is a return. it's a kind of income for the state itself and the state was using it as a measure. but anyway, that is now, no state is doing... no state is doing it. that's not an issue. and it's not our contention, it’s not arising. the only issue referred to your lordship is kesoram departing from that by correcting that error in para 34. that is limited error. so, it's a bundle of rights, the aggregate of rights which is granted by the rule, that is what is the subject matter of tax, which is also connected with the mineral value, because ultimately as an excise of mineral right, one of that right is to extract and carry away. one thing, correct that the taxes and royalty are not being levied.  out in chhattisgarh is 5% of the amount of royalty payable and that is a state tax. number of states  levied said is 5% of the amount of royalty. that's a measure, 5%. that's why i'm submitting that, actually i would say that if a measure includes royalty, is rather better than having the whole mineral value at royalty. royalty will be some percentage fixed by central government. so, it's my income with respect to the transfer of mineral rights, that's what we have submitted. now if that is taken as a value, the tax will always be lesser than if you take the whole mineral value. by striking down cess on royalty, the result has been that the states are searching and groping where to, how to take the measure. instead of the whole mineral value, you take the royalty, which is a portion fixed by this union. in chhattisgarh, they should be happy that it is pegged on the royalty, not the whole mineral value. if you take the whole mineral value, it will certainly go up, not down and that's why odissa has taken half and jharkhand has completely eliminated just per square meter. so that to avoid all this controversy this is mineral value or not mineral values... another aspect is the definition of 'land revenue' under 115 and 116 of the tamil nadu act... yes. land revenue, it means so many types of... it says, like, for example, water supplies, irrigation on the land... yes. these amount, other sum payable, royalty. royalty. so, royalty was included in land revenue. and therefore, section... the explanation included it. therefore, under the tamil nadu act, it was struck down. absolutely right. i’m obliged. your lordships is absolutely right. if the word 'royalty' was not there in the explanation. the controversy with regard to mmdr act  at all. explanation brought it in. explanation included royalty. therefore, they expanded the arguments to say that -'it is encroaching under the central act.' i agree. absolutely, that's right. but what i am trying to place it for consideration is that, had it been royalty, because royalty is a portion of the mineral value. central government fixes under section 9 and it can fix. we are not questioning. now that will be, let's say, 10% of the mineral value. so, as it is, we come down from 1000 to 100 and 100, then you impose some percentage of royalty. it's much less than paying 10%. of the whole value. so, it's up to you, my lord. i would think that taking royalty as a measure should be permissible that enables the union to then... now, what else mr. dwivedi? now, just one more aspect is that, one argument was raised, that -'we are not the owners of land, we are the occupier, so you can't...' ...  raised by mr. salve is, noscitur a sociis, my lord. point for her to argue. she has.... fine. mr dwivedi, just one point... i've a very brief note. this noscitur a sociis, my lord, how does it apply to this... what is the argument is -'take entry 45, 49, 50 neighbouring.' as i have understood, the words should be associated in the same entry. one is general one and the rest are.... you can't read taxing entries as if they form part of one fasciculus, as they used to say in the 70's. so, this noscitur a sociis.... noscitur a sociis means that when words of a general nature are followed by words of more specific nature. the general nature of the words must take colour from the specific... it should be in the same provision. for example, in this luxury tax... or as they say, "birds is a feather flock together.
" yes. that is another way of saying. or 'the man is known by the company he keeps.' may not be true because... all really shades are the same principle noscitur a sociis. don't let it flow much, so wide that the scheme breaks down. these are independent taxing entries. you can't restrict one by.... one by the other. so, each has a different taxable event. you say, "no, take it from that.
since land revenue is collected from the owner, therefore, here also it can be levied only on the owner.
" but for the respondent's benefit, if your lordship has section 4. sorry, section 3(i), at page 38 and 39 of the written submission 1(c). i'm giving the cases on noscitur a sociis. see (i), 3(i). 'expression 'mine' and 'owner' have the meanings assigned to them in the occupational safety, health, and working conditions code 2020.' this was amended by act 16 of 21. earlier, it said, as in mines act, 1952 and the owner, page 38 of the written submission, at page 29, i have quoted. sorry, page 29. this is the definition of 'mine', and at page 30, your lordships will find l, 'owner'. 'when used in relation to mine, means any person who is the immediate proprietor or lessee or occupier of the mine, or of any part thereof and in the case of the mine business, the business whereof is being carried on by liquidator or receiver, such liquidator, but does not include a person who merely receives a royalty rent of fine from mine or is merely the proprietor of the mine subject to any lease granted.' so, the lessee and the occupier are owner under the mmrd act. so, in any ways, even if noscitur a sociis is applied and we treat it as falling on the owners, the occupier and the lessee are owner. for 50 years lease, which is now mandatory under 8(a), you are the lessee and occupying and carrying on operations, and it's also a matter which your lordships' judicial notice can be taken that everywhere, the lessees are paying property tax and all those things. in our house at allahabad, it's on lease from the union and property tax is to be paid by the lessee. in fact, in that us case, which a young lawyer, mr. ghosh, had cited, the supreme court said that they are two different rights. the power to tax is to tax as a sovereign and power to enter into a contract and grant lease, et cetera, as a contractual right. so, the fact that you have given a lease and that you have not reserved any right to tax is of no avail because tax is by virtue of being a sovereign for sovereign needs. there's an interesting passage in jindal with regard to abuse of power. first of all, your lordships have consistently said that abuse of power is not a ground to test the validity. that will be tested separately. para 112. the court, very interestingly, has said that when you tax, you tax your own constituent. because we states are wanting investors to come in. they want the money to flow in. they want business. they want to give employment. so, the constituents themselves create pressure. i would submit that please take para 112 of jindal combined with rr engineering, chief justice yb chandrachud's observation that if you impose the tax so high, then the measure will lose the... and it will react on the levy and show that it's something else, which you are doing. the character is lost then. if the two things are combined then that resolves the issue of largely and rest, government of india has many powers to do. if somebody, some state is hell bent a lot to destroy the union, its fiscal policies deliberately, then 356 is there not to discharge it. in 355, they are bound to protect the federation. they can issue that. are you giving ideas? they can acquire. supposing for the critical atomic mineral, some state is acting in a particular manner, they can acquire that land. that's at page 44. anything else, now? yes, just one thing. it was said that... in the same vein and context, it was said that resources are unevenly distributed again and again it was harped upon. and therefore, few states, handful of states having resources will blackmail or do whatever, sinister. but the reality is the states which have these mineral resources are the poorest states in the country. i'm so grateful. that's exactly what i wanted to submit that's chirag tale andhera jisko bolate hai. the people are going from outside and exploiting the minerals. that's right. vedanta. who's complaining? vedanta, tatas, adanis, ambanis. they are complaining that this is too high. your lordships have detagged the assam case. we had given the state there was quite active and helpful. and so, they gave in statistics that's a company which is a government company is earning 10,000 crores per annum is not willing to part with 0.58% of that. in the last 20 years the amount of tax which they have to pay is 1500 crores and that profit is 10,000 crores per annum. because of the delay, interest has risen to by 3000 crores. but leaving that interest aside for the moment to judge the levy, 1500 crores in 20 years and 10,000 crores per annum in 20 years. so, none of these are coming out with balance sheets to tell your lordships of how much profit they are earning from this. but they are trying to paint disaster, the doomsday. as if all states are hell bent, they are something like indian states earlier, who were collaborating with the british and trying to bring down the centre. they constitute india. they are bharat. why will the states my lord... we have surrendered all the powers. they were all representatives of state elected by states in the constitute assembly. and they surrendered the power willingly because they felt that the country must unite. so, the larger share was given to union and now, we are told that you are acting something like that to destabilize and do what not. so, this uneven distribution, actually is a boon, not a bane. there would not have been trade and commerce in the world and in india if this differential distribution is not there. some state has got something to give. another state has got something else to give and that's how we unite. the economic unity is built on this differential distribution which is being decried. and uniformity of price is yet another theme. uniformity of price. does price depend only upon royalty or upon this? it will depend upon so many factors, supply and demand. the price will go up and down. these all-lease holders and sometime back in the previous decade, they were all mining iron ore and sending to china. their religion is one. as somebody said, my lord, that, in times when rome collapsed. so, it was said, lord, that venetians continued to trade with the arabs also. they used to go to jeddah and everywhere. and they said the venetians had only one religion. in that religion was prophet. so, one side had prophet muhammad, the other side had prophet... both side prophet. so, they are worried whether their profits will go down. and not concerned with this, as my lord said that - why is it? the real question is, why is it not that the regions which have got so rich in minerals, why are the people there poor even after 75 years, is the question to be asked. of course, even the states... we have to answer for that. and your lordships have been pushing this dmf and all those things, and some penalties which your lordships imposed. then your lordships have asked a separate fund to be created. justice a. k. patnaik has been appointed, my lord to see. and then we have to bring a scheme. we will spend it on these things. hospitals, education institutions and houses and water supply. so, he's monitoring. so much is being done by the courts to push the states in. so, i thought, my lord, if today somebody would have, the two governments would have seen that these people, as justice krishna iyer said, "the little man with little means.
where is he? ' he's still there, where he was.
so, this uneven distribution is, in my respectful submission, a boon.
it helps trade and commerce. it helps mobility of people of one place going to the other place.
and these companies, unless they produce their balance sheets, et cetera, they should not be heard to say that some disaster is offering at the doorstep.
what else, mr…? just one case, i want to cite, my lord, which is the last in the occupied field that is 'monetized path,' where tulloch and all those cases, hingir-rampur were discussed.
tulloch, your lordships had seen, my lord, even with regard to entry 23 and 54 relationship, since it is to the extent provided it extracts, how do the court approach the issue, when a state act is challenged?
then the court will see what is the state act doing?
is that field covered by the mmrd act?
if the field is not covered, then this occupied field theory doesn't hit the state act.
that is what tulloch said. but tulloch was dealing with the same license fee which hingir- rampur dealt with, and therefore they said, that -'since the field is occupied, therefore you can't levy that fee also.
' because all fee entries are relatable to the subject matter.
if the subject matter is gone, no fee.
kindly see page 2839 of volume v. kindly have paragraph 130.
para 130. kindly have from para 129.
their lordship also noticed the 'debate of house of commons.' give us the pdf page once again.
2839, my lords. i don't think so.
it begins at 2760. i'm reading para 129, at page 2839.
volume v. volume v. may i, please, my lord?
yes. yes. 'list i, entry 36 federal legislative list and list ii entry 23 provincial list in schedule 7 of the government of india act correspond to entry 1, list i, entry 54 and list ii, entry 23 of state list in our constitution. it is interesting to note that in the course of debates in respect of the above entries in the government of india bill, the solicitor general in the house of commons stated that the rationale of including only the regulation of mines and development of minerals and that too only to the extent it was considered expedient in public interest by federal law was to ensure that the provinces were not completely cut out from the law relating to mines and minerals. and if there was inaction at the centre, then the provinces could make their own laws. but not imposing limitations, it is inaction. thus, powers in relation to mines and minerals were accorded to both the centre and the states. the same philosophy is reflected in our constitution. the management of the mineral resources has been left with both the central government and the state governments in terms of list i, entry 54, and list ii, entry 23. in the scheme of our constitution, the state legislatures enjoy the power to enact legislation on the topics of mines and minerals development. the only fetter imposed on the state legislature under entry 23 is by the latter part of the said entry, which says, subject to the provisions of list i, with respect to regulation and development under the control of the union. in other words, the state legislature loses its jurisdiction to the extent to which the union government had taken over control. the regulation of mines and development of minerals has manifested by legislation incorporating the declaration and no more. if parliament, by its law, has declared that regulation of mines and development of minerals should be in public interest under the control of union, which it did by making declaration under section 2 to the extent of such legislation incorporating the declaration, the power of legislature is excluded. the requisite declaration has the effect of taking out regulation of mines and minerals from list ii, entry 23 to that extent. it needs no elaboration that to the extent to which the central government had taken under its control the regulation of mines and minerals development under 1957 act, the states had lost their legislative competence. by the presence of the expression to the extent hereinafter provided in section 2, the union has assumed control to the extent provided in the '57 act.
the 1957 act prescribes the extent of control and specifies it.
' so, this can't be by inferences and any other.
you have to specify the extent. 'we must bear in mind that as the declaration made in section 2 trenches upon the state legislative power it has to be construed strictly. any legislation by the state after such declaration trespassing the field occupied in the declaration cannot constitutionally stand. to find out what is left with the competence of the state legislature on the declaration having been made in section 2, one does not have to look outside the provisions of the 1957 act, but as observed in baijnath kedia have to work it out from the terms of that act. in order that the declaration made by parliament should be effective, the making of rules or enforcement of rules so made is not decisive. so, the rules, et cetera, are irrelevant. the declaration made by parliament in section 2 of the 1957 act states that it is expedient in the public interest that the union should take under its control the regulation of mines and the development of minerals to the extent provided in the act itself. legal regime relating to regulation of mines and development of minerals is thus guided by the '57 act and the '60 rules. whether reservation made by '62 and 1969 notification is any manner contrary to or inconsistent with '57 act? in my view, not at all.' now, this was a case prior to 17(a)(3) being...
now approval is required of the central government.
at that time, it was not. whether the government of the erstwhile state of bihar did not have the power to make reservation, which it did by '62 and 1969 notification. i think there was no lack of power in the state in making such reservation. i indicate the reasons therefore.' then at the bottom 133.
'no fundamental right nobody has...' which we can leave.
then kindly see 134. 139. mr. dwivedi.
i'm reading 139. your lordship will just note.
134 onwards. 'the regulation of mines and development of minerals has been taken over and under its control by the central government to the extent it is manifested in the 1957 act, which does not contemplate acquisition of mines and minerals by the presence of keynote expression to the extent here and after provided is section 2. the union has assumed control to the extent specified in the provisions following section 2. in my view, though the word 'regulation' must in the context received wide interpretation but the extent of control as specified in '57 act has to be construed strictly. the decision of the court in tulloch and bharat coking coal, baijnath kadia and few other decisions where this court held that with reference to declaration made by parliament in section 2 of the '57 act and the provisions of that act that the whole of the legislative field was covered, were in the context of specific state legislations under consider consideration.
in the context of subject state legislation, the whole legislative field was found to be occupied by the central law.
the same is the position in hingir rampur where whole of the legislative field relating to minerals was found to be covered by the declaration.
' that's all. the first five lines are....
yes. and they have dealt with all those.
what else now, mr dwivedi? also note para 141, where they have to held that the state governments are the owner of the land and minerals.
that's by virtue of the bihar act, they said.
yes. justice gokhale's judgment is conquering who all takes the same view.
so therefore, one has to see in each case the state act.
mr. singhvi's and his response to that, he referred to five cases.
odissa cements and all those cases to show that those cases took the view after india cement, following india cement and they said that the power to tax on mineral rights would be located in entry 54 list i read with entry 97 list i. now my lords, these are all cases where the supreme court was following the seven judges, judgment but they reveal that the court was struggling as in quarry owners where i was arguing.
here also, to locate where is the power flowing from?
so, in one case they say that it emanates from 54 list i, supported by entry 97.
in other cases, no, not 97. it's only 54 list i. none of them will not consider sundararamier, et cetera, because they were following india cement and it’s a tax, and therefore, actually, there was no need to find out where it is located.
but... that was the position. but there is one grave danger, my lord, when written submissions some paragraphs, or some parts of the paragraphs are quoted.
there was a reference made to para 40 of 'synthetics and chemicals', which is now also under consideration in another bench.
now para 40 is quoted. now, 'synthetics and chemicals' had nothing to do with 'mines and minerals.' it was dealing with...
the issue was whether indus... the fee on industrial alcohol could be levied by the state of u.p. or not.
so, they referred to entry 52, in ird act, that is something similar to this mmrd act.
industrial development regulation act, 1951. having referred to that, they said that the field is occupied by those act.
right or wrong, your lordships will see in the other matter.
but that was a case, which had nothing to do with mmrd act.
and they... para 40's 6 lines have been cited as if the court is holding, that this entry 50 list is subsumed or can be...
the power could be exercised under entry 54, list i. that's absolutely unfair because the next para says that it's not a mining case.
but what is an interpretation. that's what the next para says.
let me point out your unfairness, please.
no, no, i am pointing out.... or i'll come later on.
you can comment on me. i am pointing out that my learned friend should have pointed out to your lordships, that these 6 lines do not constitute the paragraph.
they are not the finding of the court; they are submission of the counsel.
and he has presented it by extracting 6 lines and telling your lordship that - 'this is dealing with it.' see para 40, my lords.
page? this is 1202, volume v. this is unfairness.
but i am not attributing unfairness, because i don't engage in these things.
it may be an error and i'm not saying that the court was not cognizant.
what i am saying is that, "you know that this case does not relate to. and yet it is being relied upon for entry 50." so, sometimes my lord, in some other matters, some passing observations do come in.
please see paragraph 40. it was submitted.
the whole paragraph is about submission. my lords have got 1202?
yes. 'it was submitted in the statement on behalf of union of india, that the legislative competence of the state enactment in the various states will have to be determined by reference to the following entries in list i of 7th schedule. entries, so and so, so and so in list iii. it was urged that there is dichotomy between 84, list i and 51, list ii. but this could not would not control the interpretation. there is no such dichotomy. it has also been stated on behalf of union of india that while opium was in entry, so and so it means that. parliament will have power, but the power to levy excise duty in opium is given to the state. similarly medicinal and toilet preparations, which contain alcohol and are fit for human consumption. the power of levy of excise is given. entry 8 of list ii, similarly is not subject to. for the reason it was submitted.' this is all submission of the union.
and what my learned friend cited is from the sentence -'the power to levy taxes is to be read from so and so.
' and then the court again said, "according to the union of india, none of the entries is so and so." so, the whole paragraph is a submission.
and my learned friend has cited it and he's attributing unfairness to me. i am not attributing, but my learned friend should withdraw the words.
it's more of para-e (28). i don't want to engage in this.
e (28) ... naturally, you have to run away from that.
my submissions are there. it's very clear.
why should it have been included? surely you would have seen.
you would have seen para 40 something is a submission, not a finding.
our submission was of mr. khambata, the learned counsel, about implied limitation drawing support from justice sikri's observation in kesavananda bharati, that is paragraph 11 of his submission.
yes. the first aspect to be noted is that justice sikri's observation is in the context of searching for limitations on the amendatory power under article 368, so as to prevent it from becoming absolute, but for this doctrine of basic structure which was drawn partly from the fabric of the constitution and partly from the word 'amend', as justice khanna interpreted it, contextually.
so, this implied limitation theory is to curb absoluteness and draw a line beyond which the amendatory power could not go.
but in the present case, it is sought to be utilized for the reverse purpose, that is, to expand the scope of limitation.
so, while limited power, a power which is, a field which is already limited, it is sought to be expanded so as to make it so absolute, that it destroys and takes away the field from the fold of the state and places it in the fold of the union.
i have dealt with this in page...
paragraph 16 of my submission, which is 1(d), this is just a small note to cover the yesterday's submission, so i had to...
the other submission was with regard to not drawing 97, list i in article 248.
i cannot do better than rely upon my lord justice nagarathna's judgment, your lordships have dealt with article 248, state of karnataka.
your lordships have said that you have to only see whether the particular field is enumerated somewhere or not.
article 248 uses the word 'enumerated 'and 97 uses the word 'mentioned'.
they are meaning the same thing. so, we have just to see, once it is mentioned there, then there is no question of 97.
no question of article 248. the only thing is, power will always remain with the state, can only be limited.
whether you can go up to complete limit, prohibiting or making it zero or not.
as in kesoram, i would submit that your lordships can leave it to the parliament's good sense to, in its wisdom and policies.
to decide if ever they want to impose limitation one and limitation has to be qua each mineral for mineral development.
so, it can't be across the board.
for example, even minor mineral usage is limited.
the parliament therefore, the government will have to of the day which moves the bill will have to apply its mind to which minerals should be allowed, to be taxed, which should not be, in which case mineral right should be allowed to be taxed, where not, how much.
but it can't be a broad brush.
it has to be a rational and reasonable exercise.
and 248 is completely out. in this submission i have enclosed that judgment.
u.s. judgment. we don't need to go.
your lordships have time again said, us laws are different but it was...
provisions were quite close but yet different.
i have demonstrated in paragraph 18 and i have annexed that judgment also your lordships' benefit.
paragraph 18 of 1(d). yes. particularly pages 145 to 147 are more relevant.
is it time to thank you, mr. dwivedi now?
thank you so much. i'll close my lord.
i should thank you, my lord, for giving me so much time and extending it beyond the lunch period.
extremely grateful. yes sansriti. mr. dwivedi, please sit by her side.
so, if there is something you can always assist her.
your lordships have my not volume i(f).
thank you, mr. dwivedi. thank you. your lordships, i have briefly covered four points.
1(f). this can be actually scanned and put.
we got it here. now it is scanned for us.
yes. your lordship, so the argument is, although parliament does not have any power to tax minerals or mineral rights, but mmdr act is exhaustive of all the fiscal exactions and therefore state is denuded of its power.
so, my lords as the expression used is colourless and neutral exactions.
and, my lords, there is nothing colourless about the exactions in our constitution.
they are structurally different, historically different, and a constitutional significance is attached to each of them.
i will refer to para 2 of my written note.
'it is submitted that, there is nothing colourless about fiscal exactions in our constitution. they are structurally distinct, historically and constitutionally distinct, meaning and significance have been attached to them, and are never used interchangeably.' para 3, i can skip, your lordships, it is jindal steel.
tax is a compulsory exaction by the state, in the capacity of a sovereign, your lordships.
when it is imposing a tax, it is imposing a tax on its sovereign.
as owners constituent. and when royalty is being levied, my lords, that is being levied in the capacity of the owner.
so even the relationship in which the state is imposing a tax, that is different, that is, sovereign taxing is constituent.
royalty, owner imposing a consideration fee for parting with the mineral resources that it has.
sub-para of para 4, your lordships. 'the constitution uses distinct expressions such as tax, duties, cesses, surcharge, fees, license fees, or fees for services rendered.' this can be found in article 110, which deals with 'money bill.' distinct words.
then royalty is used in schedule 6, para 9, my lord, of the constitution.
fines, other pecuniary penalties, again used in article 110.
so, how do we use it interchangeably, my lords?
there is no concept of uniform fiscal exaction in our constitution, my lords.
'each exaction or imposition are imposed under a distinct power, and they are distinct and not used interchangeably. tax, duties, cess and surcharge form one class of exactions which is levied under article 245, 246, read with the taxing entries. fees is another class. fees can either be regulatory or services rendered, which is levied under 245, 246, read with general entries and entry 96 and 66. now, royalty in the field of minerals, license fees for the grant of spectrum, levy charge for parting with privilege and liquor trade is neither tax nor fees. it is the price charged as owner of these resources, and in the latter case, a price of parting with privilege. constitutional bench in state of punjab versus devans modern breweries has held that levy charge for parting with privilege is neither tax nor a fee. and it is simply a levy for the act of granting permission for exercise of power to part with privilege. it is neither tax nor fee and will not attract article 301 and 304. dead rent and surface rent are payable under mmdr act to the state and the capacity of the owner and lessor of the land. when the leases of a private land with royalty, dead rent and surface rent is payable to the private person. here also, payment is given to the private person, with the capacity of owner and lessor. these levies are not mutually exclusive. state being the owner of the land can receive royalty for parting with the land with mineral rights and can also levy a tax on the same land as the capacity of the sovereign taxing its constituent. the power of state to impose tax on mineral rights under entry 50 is a power to impose tax. none of the statutory fiscal exactions mentioned in section 9, 9(a), 9(b) and 9(c) are or can be in the nature of tax. parliament has provided for payment of royalty, dead rent, surface rent, et cetera, under article 245, 246, read with entry 54, which is not a taxing field. to say that mmdr act, exhausts the field of fiscal exaction, distorts a settle distinction between these impositions. difference also arises on account of nature of relationship. when taxes being levied, the sovereign is taxing its constituent...' i can skip that.
para 8. 'it is neither tax, nor akin to tax, nor can it substitute a tax.' then an argument was made regarding uniformity.
why is it so important that all the fiscal exactions are dealt with an mmdr act?
all the subjects in list i, are those subjects which were sought to be held to be having nation-wide implications and a uniformity was envisaged.
but the fact that those subjects, those subjects don't find mention in list ii.
is that each state... justice bhanumati in a judgment in jindal my lords, she has discussed that disparity in the state of development of the states all across.
each state has its own unique natural resources.
the nature differs, the quality differs, the state of development differs, the need differs.
so, to have a uniform fiscal policy for the entire country, this is destructive of federalism, because the states should be in a position to devise their legislative mechanism to deal with their individual needs.
so, there can't be straitjacket formula for list ii.
that was never the intention. those subjects would not have been put in list ii my lords.
khazan chand's judgment, paragraph 2 of this heading.
it says -'subjects regarding which uniformity was envisaged were put in list i and the other subject...
' and therefore your lordships an article 14 argument can never be made by comparing one law of another state and some other state.
para 4 -'like there cannot be any taxation by inference, similarly, there cannot be any limitation by inference on sovereign power of taxation.
firstly, limitations need to be expressed. ' jindal has been covered my lords.
'and secondly, even the express limitations need to be construed strictly. constitutionally, taxation by inference is a paradox.' then your lordships, fiscal federalism.
'the jurisprudence regarding federalism, which is the basic feature of the constitution, is becoming more nuanced.' and your lordships, i have borrowed these expressions from your lordship's judgment in mohit minerals.
'there is collaborative federalism, competitive federalism, and federalism involving condescension. the consultative and participative exercise of royalty fixation is an instance of collaborative federalism. the states designing their fiscal measures by giving incentives, tax holidays, exemptions, lower tax rates to attract investment or increased tax base is an instance of competitive federalism. the states contesting for their power conferred under the constitution is a case of federalism in contestation. this aspect of federalism should not be seen as disruptive, but it is abundant duty of the states to ensure that no limitations are imposed de hors the constitution in the interest of uniformity national interest your lordships.' article 249 deals with laws relating to national interest my lords.
that deals with a situation where there may be a subject in the state list, but in the interest of national interest, there may be laws.
so, there's a procedure prescribed. the resolution has a fixed life of six months.
so, national interest, then you go to article 249 if it is permissible.
'there are express provisions in the constitution for situations requiring subordination of powers of the state in national interest, and the procedure is also described in article 249. the states have plenary and exclusive powers over list ii subjects. and that means they do not and should not have to knock on the doors of the centre for imposing levies which they are exclusively empowered to charge. knocking on the doors of the centre for tax relating to list ii subject is not collaborative federalism, but subversion of federalism. therefore, fiscal federalism is the most basic and fundamental aspect of federalism. the existence of state depends on taxes, and they form the lifeline of the state, without which states are rendered nothing but paper tigers. ‘your lordships, then the argument is limitation will include prohibition. and this is based on those judgements your lordships... article 19(6) judgments. haan. sorry your lordships. 19(6) and those general provisions which say that regulation will include prohibition. hind stone line of cases my lord. so, if your lordships just turn to entry 50 first. this says -'taxes on mineral rights, subject to any limitation imposed by parliament by law relating to mineral development.
' my lords, my first submission is, 'regulation' word does not find presence here my lords.
the term is 'limitation'. regulation, your lordships have found in entry 54.
but here the power is given to the parliament to impose limitation, not to regulate power of the state.
you can regulate under entry 54. you can make laws for mining.
you can prohibit mining of a certain mineral.
you can prohibit mining of a certain...
for a certain period, import. that you can do under 54.
but here word regulation is not there, limitation is there.
so, to import those cases which say regulation will include prohibition that doesn't apply your lordships.
and your lordships, the term 'limitation' is used in one another provision of constitution, which is article 134.
correct. just one second. your lordship's limitation is found in another provision, which is article 134, which deals with appellate jurisdiction of this hon’ble court.
i'll just read it out. 134(2), 'parliament may by law confer on the supreme court and any further powers to entertain and hear appeals from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a high court in the territory of india subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in such law.' when such restrictive words are being used in context of a court or of a co-equal organ to say that limitation will include destruction.
yes. so, under the regulatory power of 54.
you can do whatever in the field of mining, but once you are imposing a limitation, you are not regulating the power of taxation here.
you are imposing a limitation. yes. so that is, and your lordships, mr. dwivedi has already cited cases on entry 57 but i just want to repeat.
entry 50... if your lordship sees entry 57 list ii.
this is one other entry where the taxing power of the state has been made subject to the parliamentary law.
this is under 35 concurrent list. and 35 refers the principles for the formulation of rate.
context of entry 57 your lordships have held that - yes, they are allied subjects, but they are distinct.
so, in assam judgment at page 53 of the main written submission, 1(a) your lordships.
the issue was the assam legislation had increased the rates of the taxes, so that was challenged being contrary to the parliamentary law.
the constitution bench held that though the power is allied, one is power to tax, one is power to lay down the principle for fixation of taxation.
so, yes, you can do it, but you can do it only under the general power.
you can limit, you can also go to the extent of saying that 5% or maybe for next five years you're not going to tax, but to say that under this limitation you can regulate the power of state that is an incorrect submission to with great respect.
my lords, i think that i have covered.
thank you, sansriti. thank you. i think we had said that only one rejoinder otherwise there will be.
in the beginning, we took less than time what was allotted to us.
your lordship allotted 2 and 1//2 days.
we concluded before two days. both of us will conclude within the time which is remaining.
we are in rejoinder. all right. just two or three minutes.
the entire debate is list ii. now, lordship may kindly note, list ii has entries from 1 to 66.
in effect, 7 entries have been deleted.
there are 59 entries in list ii out of which 36 entries are without any restrictions.
just one second. so now, out of 66, out of 59 entries today in list ii, i have put that in my volume 1(c).
page 52 onwards. out of 59 entries in list ii today, how many were deleted?
out of 66, seven were deleted. 7 have been omitted.
yes, by different amendments, including 101st amendment.
36 entries are without limitations whatsoever or restrictions, i'll not use the word limitation, restrictions whatsoever.
and 23 entries have limitations of different degree.
or you would say restrictions of various degree.
restrictions of different degree which i have put in my written note in the chronological order from category 1 to category 10 in page 52 and 53 of volume i(c).
where is it? your written note as volume i(c), page?
page 52 and 53. if your lordship only see one entry.
i have put a name in chronological order.
yes. your lordships only see one entry 37 of list ii and my lord, 50 of list ii.
wide range of difference. for example, 37.
i have quoted them subsequently in 58, 59 onwards.
i am summarized them at 52. if your lordship see, page, entry 37, which i've extracted at page 59 of volume i(c).
'elections to the legislature of the state, subject to the provisions of any law, made by the parliament.' it's a very broad.
now, your lordships, contrast it with entry 50 of list ii.
my lord, the argument on the other side is -'once there is a laid provision of law made by the parliament, entire entry is eclipsed or gone.
' these are of different degree. the limitation itself has a limitation.
and those degrees my lord, i have put it in para....
page 52, para... paragraph. 2. where have you put it, mr. hansaria?
in the descending order, i have put it my lord.
lordship had asked me, "what are the limitations?" which, i have tried to illustrate in paragraph 4 of page 53.
i'm sorry. it's page 52. my lord, the chief justice has got it, my lord?
yes. because, first category is, subject to any law made by the parliament, is widest enough, my lord.
second category is 'accept.' that is in entry 3 and 65.
third category is not specified. 'subject to or other than.' then, my lord, not including, other than, to the extent, subject to 1 and 3, then subject to 1, then subject to 3, and thereafter comes, my lord, 'subject to the limitation imposed by the parliament.' the argument is, this is the widest enough.
which is in fact, this is the least restrictions, my lords, the parliament has thought it to impose or the constitution thought to prescribe.
secondly, lordships have been asking, "what are the limitations?" which i have tried to give by way of illustrations in page 54 a, b, c and d, paragraph 4.
'it can be extent or quantity of mineral that can be extracted, that is, by way of regulation. you can also say, on what basis the valuation should be done for the purpose of taxation? it can be price fixed by the indian good of mines. it can be pit head price, it can be sale price, it can be tax at the point of extraction of mineral, at the time, dispatch of mineral. it can be a sealing...' my lord.
repeatedly asking 500%. we are not saying that parliament cannot do it, the limitation.
parliament can say - 'all right, it cannot be more than so and so percent of so and so.' so, it can put a sealing.
the period of exemption of a particular period or a particular area, or a particular mineral.
these are the limitations and not the complete abridgement.
para 5 and 6, my lord, my learned friend, mr. dwivedi has gone...
taken to your lordship. now my lord, para 7 is important.
if your lordships kindly come to page 55.
now, my lord, entry 54, before 6th amendment, was 'taxes on sale or purchase of wood other than newspapers.' it stopped there.
this subject to 1992. has come under the 6 amendment.
and before that, the 6th amendment, there was no power of the parliament to tax on, sale or purchase of goods.
it was introduced only by the 6th amendment, and it was only controlled by article 286, which i have extracted at page 56, footnote.
'there were limitations on the power of the state, and by virtue of article 286, which were very specific, and precise, that's where, you cannot tax outside.
you cannot tax import or import. you cannot tax in the course of interested trade or commerce.
you cannot tax goods declared to be essential for the life of the community, which were subsequently made of special importance.
' article 286 as adopted, provided in clause 3 of article 286, saying that - 'parliament can be.... cannot be... no law for the imposition of taxes. it will be declared by the parliament, to be essential for the life of the community, which were subsequently made special important.' that is, they were declared goods under the cst act.
so, these are the limitations. and not a power of enabling as we put it in the beginning.
this is limitation power and not an enabling power.
and finally, form k has been read to your lordship as a statute levying tax.
if your lordships see rule 31. rule 31, which prescribed form k, it says as nearly as in form k or in a form as near thereto as circumstances of each case may require.
so that is where the contract is my lord.
if your lordships kindly see rule 31, which is in volume iv....
you have quoted it in.... page 1644.
you have quoted it at 57. i have quoted it my lord.
57. page 57. yes, my lord. page 57 i have quoted it.
rule 13 my lord, form k is a modal form and it can be buried with the statute itself.
and it says in form k or in a form, if it's a taxing, it cannot be left to the parties of the bargain it.
so, that is where it has been left to the discretion of the parties, to what extent they can modify.
and that has been read to your lordships as if it's a taxing power by the centre.
and finally, yes, the judgment my lord the chief justice said as is given in para 13, that the form cannot control, justice chinnappa reddy's judgment, that is (1986) 1 scc 264 at 319, para 69, which says surely form cannot control acts, rules or the direction.
it can definitely not control a constitutional entry, a sovereign power to tax by the state.
and finally, both the mineral companies and even the union of india has relied upon the house of commons debate to interpret a constitutional entry of 13th may 1935.
what they were debating was one of the issues was whether indian subject of his majesty should be there or british subject domicile in india is there.
those debates cannot be relied upon. i'm so sorry.
if your lordships kindly see the debate.
one more objection. final my lord. the affidavit of the union of india.
if your lordships see para 12, i have quoted it.
page 57. they say, entries in the union of india affidavit i'm quoting of 26 february 2024 -'entry of list ii, list ix cannot be absurdly wide reading, and that the provisions of mmdr must be given wide and liberal construction.
' this cannot be the stand of the union of india on affidavit before your lordships' court.
i'm extremely grateful. we are extremely grateful.
thanks mr. hansaria. mr. reddy? my lord, before mr. reddy begins, i just want to renew my request.
i see it's only 12 minutes to go.
my lord, there are some new points which have been made because actually we opened the case and mr. dwivedi....
there was no new point made. there was no new point made.
it's an explanation. if i had time, i would have told your lordships what is the new point.
decoupling was a phrase you used. so, mr. dwivedi....
my lord, i am sorry. i did not have...
if my learned friend had opened, i would have replied.
i opened with decoupling. he has given an answer to, which i have not had a point to say where he's wrong.
that's what i meant. if your lordship permits a note....
if we permit you, there'll be another round.
a surrejoinder by their side. my lord, just a note.
please allow us to deal with what he has said.
i will not go back to my original.
that your lordships has already. the two points which he made today, entry 49, entry 50 and land, and he made some submissions on when the land is decoupled.
just a 4-page note. what you can do is, mr. salve, you can file a note not exceeding 3 pages.
just... yes, my lord, done. yes, absolutely.
and not necessarily three pages my lord.
can i also file a note? only 2 to 3 pages on new points.
alright. especially entry 49. my lords. that is what our concern is.
certainly mr. solicitor. and my lords, we'll file it by end of friday.
should we be limiting the size of the note, or should we be regulating the size of the note?
as long as you allow. your lordship allows us to develop it.
but i suggest is that mr. solicitor, mr. salve, mr. bagaria give us one note of not more than 3 pages.
please put your heads down together and give us one note.
i think that would be better. conceptually better we shall do that.
we will do that. i just wanted to give a reference to the notifications where royalty was revised, excluding the state of west bengal.
just the note. what is in the note?
we have pulled pen drive now. two-page references only.
2004 revision is at page 2170, volume iv.
2007 notification is at volume iv, page 2170 a  2004 notification is at page 15312, volume iii.
may i please your lordships? i'm grateful.
volume i is my submission. i don't propose to read it because i have very little time.
i'll just state three or four points that i've touched upon in my note, kindly have volume i(e) for your lordships reading agenda.
what are the points? the point is, first point that i touched upon in my submissions is that minerals do not automatically vest in the state.
that's a wrong concept. the judgment of this honourable court in, thressiamma jacob that specifically refers to different lands having different characters.
it notes that in different states there are different tenure right.
for instance, when surplus lands reverted to the state, states then grant what are called as tenure rights.
ryotwari pattas in the south of india and some other terminology used in rest of the country.
when ryotwari pattas are granted in respect of lands that revert to the state, there state only grants cultivation rights.
so, subsoil rights remain with the state, surface rights remain with the cultivator.
this is one category of land. rule 72 in the morning, my learned friend mr. ganguli showed your lordships, the statute was cognizant.
that there could be one category of lands like this.
the statute was equally cognizant. there could be private lands where the subsoil rights vest in the persons who own the land.
like in thressiamma jacob's case, there was one category of landowners who were found to have subsoiled rights.
but in the house of commons debate that is placed for your lordships, it notes the position at the time government of india act was being made, that in bengal, state of bengal while it was believed that under the british rule only the surface rights were granted, for over 100 years each of the landowners were exercising subsoil rights without any complaint from the crown.
so therefore, those rights in that sense remain ceded.
so, my lord, that this concept that of all minerals vest in the state, therefore the royalty exclusively goes to the state, is my respectful submission is a wrong argument.
so, that's one point i've touched upon giving some details.
i also said that from 1901, the mines act, followed by the successor 1923 act, 1948 act, the rules, 1957 act, consistently throughout recognize this position that minerals do not automatically vest in the state.
this is very important because if minerals do not automatically vest in the state, and if the royalty and dead rent becomes payable to the mineral owners, it is actually a consideration for one-time finite resource.
the royalty, the expression, i have touched upon it in my submission.
it has been explained to say that, unlike land, where cultivation can go on, on a recurring basis, my lord in respect of mineral it is a onetime finite source.
so, an owner of a land who has a subsoil rights.
it could be the government, it could be a private person, it could be a limited right of a private person or the government having subsoil rights.
when they give out these mining lease, the lessee extracts the mineral out.
so, there's a one time complete exhaustion of a finite mineral resource.
therefore, there's a compensation that has to be paid to the landowner who loses that mineral forever because it is a finite source.
so, royalty is therefore not an exaction, levied by law.
it is not a tax. royalty is a consideration for the grant of right.
what 9 does, in the regulatory sphere, and it is permissible is, it caps the consideration that can be levied, by a person who owns the mineral.
but for 9, every person can quote his own right as to, what he would ask for, for the purpose of giving a land on mining lease.
this may come in the way of the country's developments or regulation steps in, section 9 comes in, royalty is fixed.
dead rent is fixed. my learned friend mr. dwivedi showed to your lordships, there's a little leeway in respect of private landowners.
dead rent is fixed as per schedule 3.
royalty my lord may not be fixed in respect of private landowners, because that rule 45 does not take into account that royalty fixation in inter se to private owners.
so, if royalty is therefore, in my respectful submission, not an exaction.
it is actually a regulatory limitation of consideration that can be taken under a contract, for granting mineral rights.
so, if it is limiting the consideration, a contractual consideration, it can never have the sovereign character of tax.
and if it has... if we try to be contended and it was, and i'm therefore making that submission that it has every trapping of tax.
it can never go to a private person.
if it is going to a private person, and it is not going to the state, state gets nothing in those categories of land and in those states where subsoil rights may vest exclusively with private people all there.
so, there's absolutely no element of tax.
so, my lord, it is one point i touched upon.
only one... quickly another point. with regard to tax on land.
please see the situation when they say that -'5...
50 completely eclipses 49. ' my lord, 'eclipses' i'm using the word literally.
not in the legal sense. mr. dwivedi was at pains to point out.
it cannot be. because, land is a continuing exist...
it has a continuing existence. land has been in existence throughout.
50 comes in only and only when a mining lease is executed.
if there is no mining lease, executed, i may have mineral in my soil, but i am carrying on cultivation.
my lord, i do not come under 50.
state cannot tax me. because it is land and i am cultivating the land.
i am subject to 49. 50 comes in respect of one aspect of mineral rights.
my lord, please see the situation after the mining is complete.
mining cannot be forever. it can go on for 30 years, 50 years, depending on the mineral-richness of the soil.
after 50 years, land reverse to being land again.
it can be taxed again under entry 49.
so, pre-mineral lease 49, post-exhaustion of mineral or determination of lease 49 applies.
so, 49 cannot go into this hiatus for the limited period mining lease operates.
so, mining lease deals with a different aspect of mineral rights.
land remains land. it's a permanent feature.
it continues to be land even when it is being mined.
it does not take it outside the taxation fore.
the government, in a given case, they're to abuse 49 power to surreptitiously override any limitations, that the parliament, by law may impose.
then the court would strike it down for being a colourable piece of legislation.
so therefore, i touched upon this aspect, that land and 49 is something that cannot be made subject to 50, which is purely temporal and on a completely different aspect.
the last aspect that i touched upon, that house of commons debate that has been placed by your lordships.
that's a very interesting thing. the joint parliamentary committee, when it made recommendations on government of india act, the recommendation it made was - 'taxes on mineral rights should be given, my lord, to the federal government.' that went before the house of commons when they debated government of india act.
post-debate, post mr. percy's concern, lord percy's concerns that were expressed, my lord, the british parliament made the government of india act, which actually moved it.
it is an improvement on the constituent assembly debate.
it was not originally, my lord, in the provincial list.
notwithstanding these concerns, they wanted to give this power to the provinces.
because provinces must realize some revenue. so contrary to the joint parliamentary committee recommendation....
my note, my lord, gives us entries in this.
it was moved to the provincial list.
so, first is contention. very importantly, the last of the submissions, i put it in my note.
a case arose from the country of canada on british north american act.
there were two entries. my lord, the federal list had an entry saying that - 'it would deal with incorporation of banks, trade and commerce.' provincial list says that 'provinces can levy tax on entities for augmenting its resources.’ matter went up before the privy council. contention was if provinces were to act excessively and collect heavy taxes. it would come in the way of regulation of trade and commerce by the federal government. such power must not, therefore, be ceded to the provinces. but i've placed that judgment.
that judgment which is not an identically worded terms, but on similar arguments that have been advanced, that were rejected by the privy council, stating that when this act vested this authority with the provinces and their governments, it did not suppose that these provisions will be used injuriously, excessively, or arbitrarily.
it reposed faith in these provinces, to exercise their power judiciously.
i'm sorry. so, therefore, that judgment may have some guiding factors for your lordships.
i've placed it also as a part of my submission.
but i'm deeply grateful, my lord. thank you. arguments concluded. judgment reserved.
