justice jeremy johnson for visiting the supreme court.
so, on behalf of the members of the bar and all my colleagues, i have pleasure in welcoming them to our court.
we welcome your lordships and your ladyship.
this is an application which has been moved by the election commission of india my lord.
this for a minor modification. my lords had directed the data which was submitted before this honourable court by two orders in the sealed envelope.
the impression perhaps was that one of the copies of that data is with commission.
but ... we assume that you would have retained a copy of what you have submitted in the court.
it was supposed to be in sealed cover, taking the information from the political party, so we just submitted it as it is we got.
so, the entire data is with this honourable court.
so, what we could do is, we will ask our office to scan and digitize the data which has been submitted to us.
that might just take a day or so, i think because they start doing it immediately.
that can be postponed, their putting it up on the website.
as soon as the data which is available with us is scanned and digitized, that will be handed over to the...
the originals will be returned to the election commission.
they will immediately upload it. fair enough.
no objection. your lordships indicated also on the last occasion.
now, just one thing. who's appearing for the state bank of india?
because in our judgment, we had directed, disclosure specifically of all details of the bonds, including the purchaser, the amount and the date of purchase.
they have not disclosed the bond numbers because that had to be disclosed by the state bank of india.
because if you see our judgment... your lordships' judgment is quite clear on that, all details.
so, all details have to be furnished by the state bank of india.
and for the government. and they had said in their own application that they have the bond numbers, et cetera.
but they have said that they were in two different silos.
that's right. the sbi's request for extension was on the ground.
sbi is not a party. they were here because they moved an application.
anyway, if they disclose the bond number, we have no problems at all.
lordships may issue notice to sbi, my lords.
my lord, may i mention my lord...
lordships may issue notice to sbi, my lords.
no, no, no. don't. i am requesting the honourable court.
an application has been filed by the election commission of india seeking further directions.
in the order of this court, dated 11th of march, 2024, this court had directed that election commission of india, that eci shall upload on its website the data which was furnished to this court and which was being maintained in the custody of this court.
while issuing this direction, the court had presumed that a copy of the data which was lodged before this court, before the registry of this court would be available with the eci.
mr. amit sharma, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of eci states that as a matter of fact, eci did not retain any copy of the data, which was collated by it since it was being placed before this court in safe custody.
the request, therefore, of the eci is that the data which was being filed in this court may be returned to it so as to enable it to comply with the order of this court for uploading all the documents.
this request of the eci has not been opposed either by mr. kapil sibal the senior counsel or prashant bhushan learned counsel and mr. vijay hansaria.
we accordingly issue the following directions: 1) the registrar judicial of this court shall ensure that the data which was been filed by eci in pursuance of the interim orders of this court is scanned and digitized.
upon the process being complete, this may be preferably carried out by 05:00 p.m. tomorrow.
2) once the above exercise is completed, the original shall be returned to mr. amit sharma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the eci.
eci shall then upload the data on its website within a period of, on or before day after.
a copy of the digitized may also be given, so it will not take time.
yes. fair enough. a copy of the scanned and digitized files shall also be made available to mr. amit sharma.
so as to update replication of the process of scanning and digitization.
so, now we'll pass another order. would your lordships consider issuing notice to sbi?
they may have something to say. they should be here when the matter is going on.
i'm sorry my lords. please. they filed an application which is disposed of, they are not parties.
but really speaking we can take exception to what they have disclosed because they were bound, duty bound...
i'm not appearing for sbi. the court can pass an order.
i'm not here for politics. what is the operative direction in clause ...?
my lord, may i mention, my lord.
eci shall submit details of the electoral bonds purchased since the of the court 12th february till date to the eci.
the details shall include the date of the purchase of each electoral bond, the name of the purchaser of the bond and the denomination of the electoral bond purchased.
shall include, doesn't mean it will exclude sbi.
your lordship order is clear. what your lordship meant...
allow me. allow me, sir. allow me. sbi shall submit the details of political parties, which have received contributions through electoral bonds since the interim order of the court dated 12th april, till the date of the eci.
sbi must disclose details of each electoral bond encashed by political parties, which shall include the date of the encashment and the denomination of the bonds.
so, this is an inclusive order. it shall include all details.
would your lordships see b and c. and your lordship has said that the reason...
b and c of your lordship is original.
i'm not appearing. i am assisting. i feel sbi needs to be...
the order of this court, the judgment of the constitution bench required sbi to furnish to eci, all details of the electoral bonds purchased and as the case may be redeemed by political parties, including the date of purchase, what are the other...
name of purchaser, purchase which have received, sorry.
and the denomination. and the denomination. name of the purchaser, and the date of purchase/redemption.
it has been submitted, that sbi has not disclosed has not disclosed the electoral bond numbers.
what is it called? is it called the unique identification number or is it called the...
it is called the alpha numeric number on each bond.
the alpha numeric number of the electoral bonds.
the solicitor general submits that since he is not appearing for the sbi, notice may be issued to sbi.
we direct the registry to issue notice to sbi returnable on monday.
we will keep it on monday. deeply obliged.
obliged. may i mention my lord, mr. aggarwala, just a moment.
don't intervene. a copy of this order shall be served by the, shall be forwarded by the registrar judicial on the standing counsel appearing for sbi.
may i request one thing.... or mr. kapoor, mr. sanjay kapoor.
may i request your lordships are keeping this on monday.
we have guests among us. this mentioning can wait till monday.
i hope, my lord, i can convey myself.
they also agree with us. there is something to be said for what the solicitor said.
mr. aggarwala, would you like to mention this...
my lord, i sent yesterday one request to honourable lordship for suo moto...
with reading our files and correspondence both, would you like to mention this on monday, mr. aggarwala.
your lordship are not fully aware... all of us fully....
will request to file for application but i was not a party my lord.
please respect the sentiments of your colleague, all of us have jointly requesting you to mention on monday. deeply obliged.
