it is a matter which is vested today itself.
with respect, if i may submit? the question here is, it was de-tagged in 2009.
again, somehow in 2016, it got tagged.
who are you appearing for ma'am?
i'm appearing for kesar enterprises and state of up is the appellant.
my learned friend. so does this have to be tagged or de-tagged?
my friend says is that this is a matter pertaining
to potable alcohol and it resulted in wastage because of accident.
therefore, the state was demanding excise duty on potable alcohol there.
so we are not concerned with potable alcohol at all.
so can we just de-tag that matter?
i think it can be.
because, this matter does not pertain to industrial alcohol at all.
it pertains to wastage of potable liquor, which is for human consumption, my lord.
so we can de-tag that. it can be.
i am deeply obliged. just keep this, you've taken the number.
but before i begin my lord, i must submit an apology.
because of my colourful grey hair. because of the holi part.
that's the disadvantage of having too many children and grandchildren.
you can't save yourself. nothing to do with the alcohol.
it does my lord.
holi means partly alcohol, and i must confess
i am fond of at least whiskey part.
to begin with this daunting task, your lordship might permit me to place
one or two pages of my written submission initially because that will highlight
the question involved and what has to be considered and answered by lordships.
this is pdf page. volume 1(a) my lord.
volume 1(a).
it is a daunting task to appear before nine judges with this court, but
then it is made more daunting by your lordship's insistence on the paperless series.
do you realize how simple it is?
it cuts down on time and it's so streamlined for
all of you because you can switch from file to file.
maybe at your lordship's age perhaps it's easier, but
of my age, it becomes a little more difficult.
what are you saying, dwivedi ? have lordships have my written submissions?
yes. volume 1(a).
but the issue involved in this case is primarily concerning state's
jurisdiction over industrial alcohol or rectified spirit, for short ia, industrial
alcohol, and this rectified spirit is also called ethyl alcohol as an alternative.
in the synthetics second case, that is, the 1990 supreme court, it was
categorically held that rectified, the denatured spirit is industrial alcohol and is outside
the state's jurisdiction under entry 8, list ii of the eighth schedule to the constitution.
entry 8, list ii, when it refers to intoxicating liquor deals
only with potable alcohol, when it is had as it is.
synthetics too, further went to the extent of denying jurisdiction to states
in relation to industrial alcohol, even under entry 33, list iii, as
products of a notified brief scheduled industry under the industrial development regulation act.
hereinafter, it was idea namely declaration by parliament under section 2 of the idr act
read with section 18 of the idr act covers the entire field, ousting state's jurisdiction.
the sole issue broadly is whether states have legislative jurisdiction
to deal with and regulate industrial alcohol as well as
the expanse of it; whether the jurisdiction is exclusive or concurrent.
synthetics too is erroneous on both the terms.
it is for this reason that the reference order of the constitution
bench dated 08-12-2010 doubts the correctness of it after meticulously examining the judgment.
the state's jurisdiction over industrial alcohol can be exercised in two ways.
a) state has jurisdiction and control over industrial alcohol under entry 8, list ii
or states have jurisdiction in respect of industrial alcohol under entry 33, list iii
as a product of notified scheduled industry under
the idr act, and the field is unoccupied.
this is a statement which your lordship must mark that the field is unoccupied.
because entry 33 in list iii, question of occupied field will arise.
intoxicating. i'll come to this. then kindly have.
i have framed for your lordships convenience the questions.
page 29. your lordships have page 29 of the volume 1?
page 29 of the volume 1 itself would have the questions.
'whether state can regulate and control industrial alcohol.'.
page 29. it's page 29 of volume 1(a).
same volume. questions for consideration.
'whether state can regulate and control industrial alcohol, commonly called rectified spirits of more
than 95% v/v including denatured spirit. this has two aspects. (a) one, whether industrial
alcohol is included in entry 8, list ii and is therefore, within its exclusive
jurisdiction and control. or two, whether it falls under entry 24 of list ii
and therefore, can travel on to entry 52 of list i on specification of
fermentation industry as a notified industry under industrial disputes, development and regulation act.' my
lord, this question, if i may pause for a moment and elaborate a little?
entry 52, list i is the entry under which idr act
was issued in the year 1951 enabling the centre or the
union to specify which of the industries it wants to take over.
now, entry 52 is intricately linked with entry 24, list ii.
your lordship would have entry 24.
would you like to just sort of show us
the entry so that we can at the outset.
i'll come to that. let's look at the entries first.
the whole thing turns in on the construction of the entries in this case.
quite right. so let's look at the different entries which are involved.
that's the best way to go about it.
then we'll, of course, read your questions.
the first entry to be taken into consideration is entry 52, list i.
this is where the synthetics ii had placed industrial alcohol, because idr act
comes in and fermentation industry was notified in the year 1956 under the
schedule to the idr act, implying thereby that the declaration under idr act
would apply and this industry is abstracted from entry 24, list ii and
goes on to entry 52, list i. so once
a declaration is made, entry 52 comes in operation.
otherwise entry 52, list i has no. it's a shell.
it is inoperative until unless there is a declaration.
so you find a placed entry 52.
yes. may i?
'industries, the control of which by the union is declared by parliament
by law to be expedient in the public interest.' so what it
implies is those industries where the union feels that the control should
come to the union and the parliament has to declare it by
law, that law will indicate the extent of control it wants to take over also.
and that industry to that extent, comes over too.
but importantly, along with 52, if i may juxtapose entry 24, list ii because
we can't understand entry 52, list i without looking into entry 24, list ii.
24 is industries subject to the provision of entry 7
in 52 of list i. so there is an inherent
link between entry 52, list i and entry 24, list ii.
industry as a subject originally belongs to the state jurisdiction.
just for a moment, keep out the idr act or the declaration.
entry 24 is subordinate to entry 52 of list 1.
no difficulty. it is. there's no doubt about it.
it is subject to.
but what i am saying is that let us for a moment,
for the purposes of analysis, take out the idr act or the declaration.
then what conclusion that comes to the fore is that entry
24 is the basic entry where state has jurisdiction over industry.
now, that word, 'industry' transports to or gets
transported to entry 52 on a declaration by parliament.
if parliament makes a declaration. no, that.
actually entry 52.
entry 24 of list i. of list ii
is made subject to entry 52 of list 1.
entry 52 of list 1, which gives the dominance to a parliamentary law
is, provided parliament has made a declaration in the law of entry 52.
that's what i'm saying. unless there is a declaration, the jurisdiction vests in the state.
obviously. thats it. right. but once the declaration is made under entry 52.
then that part which is taken over goes to the union.
further, very interesting thing is, look at entry 54 in contrast to 52.
i mean, you were dealing with entry 54 just two weeks ago.
yes, mines and minerals.
'mines and mineral development to the extent to which regulation and development under the control
of the union is declared by parliament by law to be expedient in the public
interest.' now, the words, 'to the extent to which' are interestingly absent in entry 52.
there is a reason.
so, once parliament makes a declaration, as in this case under section
2, the entirety of that field of that industry is within the control.
it's not to be extent to it.
i'll answer that question.
that question has very frequently arisen, and lordships
have answered it on a number of occasions.
the word, '54' here, if your lordship could once again have a look at 54.
there's a difference in the two entries.
yes.
'regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent to which such
regulation and development under the control of the union is declared by
parliament by law to be expedient in public interest.' now, the word,
'to the extent to which' has been used for an obvious reason.
word not here, the entry 54 includes both the manufacturing that is mines.
that's the factory part, the manufacturing part and includes mineral.
so there's nothing else there left.
so both the things come over here on a declaration.
unlike industries, when a declaration is made, the product of the industry doesn't go there.
here, the product of the industry is taken over under entry 24.
but in case of industry, entry 52.
your lordship may have entry 33, list iii.
so it's not that the whole industry goes over
or everything goes relating to that industry goes over.
kindly have entry 33, list iii.
so we will have to consider, what is the ambit
of the word, 'industry', and that will have to be
assessed first and foremost in the context of the state entries.
the reason being, entry 24 is intricately linked with entry 52, because whatever
can be drawn under entry 52 is from entry 24 and no other entry.
then kindly have 26 and 27. entry 26 and 27 of list ii.
actually just dwell on entry 33. very well.
you can read entry 33. that might help you.
'trade and commerce in and the production, supply and distribution of the products of
any industry where the control such industry by the union is declared by parliament
by law to be expedient in public interest and imported goods of the same
kind as such product.' so therefore, trade and
commerce, supply and distribution don't go to entry 52.
so it's very interesting because once a declaration is made by law of
parliament under entry 52, the trade and commerce is taken out of the
field of entry 52 and immediately goes into entry 33 of list iii.
as product of the notified industry. right.
to the extent therefore, the regulation of trade and commerce,
production, supply and distribution best goes into the concurrent list.
the law made then by the state legislature can be
overridden by a law which is made by article 254.
there is no difficulty. and i'll say as i said.
but entry 33.
entry 33 is an indication that notwithstanding a declaration which is made
under entry 52, a law made by parliament under entry 52 of
list i, they still lie in the province of the states, albeit
under the concurrent list, namely trade, commerce and production, supply and distribution.
now importantly, since lordships have noticed this, kindly come to the state list again.
in other words, the domain of entry 52 will
be everything pertaining to that industry minus entry 33.
yes. it will be more apparent. we note an exception.
absolutely.
entry 33, list iii, it carves out an exception within the
domain of entry 52, list i. yes, your lordship is right
because then now trade and commerce, supply and distribution would not
come under entry 52, list i, even if it is a notified industry.
but before i proceed further, kindly have again, once again, come to the state list.
list ii, entry 24 and if your lordship would permit
me to elaborate on this, then things would become clearer.
which entry? 24. once again, industries subject to the provisions of entry 7 and 52.
now, we are not concerned with 7.
we're concerned with 52 of list i. in other words, your lordships
are right when lordships said that it is subject to, therefore, subordinative.
now, the important part is, kindly see entry 26.
state list. entry? 26.
'trade and commerce within the state subject to the provisions of
entry 33 of list iii.' so the trade and commerce in
the product of the industry is still in the state list.
i'm saying for a moment imagine that there's no idr for entry 52.
then what is the position?
then entry 26 of list ii would be subordinate to entry 33.
list iii. that's accepted, my lord. i would accept that.
there's no doubt about it. then 27 again.
entry 27. entry 33 is the combination of these two entries, 26 and 27.
sorry. let me again explain it from the ground level, which is the state list.
now state list contains three entries, your lordships have seen.
industry, which is basically state subject.
then the trade and commerce and the production and supply do not fall in
the word, 'industry' because there is a separate entry for that, 26 and 27.
so 26 and 27 will never come toward industry.
now, when the idr act makes a declaration with regard to
any industry, there are a couple of questions that will arise.
one is, what will idr act take from the state list, the declaration?
it will only draw from entry 24.
it can't take over from entry 26 and 27 because that goes to entry 33.
the product of the declared or unnotified or scheduled industry
doesn't fall in entry 52 but goes to entry 33.
right. now the question is, my lord.
so therefore, the entire doctrine of occupied field may not then be applicable to entry
52 of list i, because on the face of the entry, a certain field notwithstanding
the declaration under entry 52 of list i, falls under entry 33 of list iii.
undoubtedly.
and the object of the parliament, of the framers in putting it
in entry 53 was, notwithstanding the declaration under entry 52, the states
will still have power in respect of trade, commerce, production, supply and distribution.
right. now, before we come to.
these entries 26 and 27, advisedly they are not made subject to entry 52.
my lord, not made subject to. subject to 33.
they are only subject to 33 and 24
is subject to 52, not 26 and 27.
they are independent entries.
so if the parliament wants to take over anything pertaining to the trade
and commerce, supply and distribution, then it has to pass some law under 33.
now, the other correction which i may be permitted to make is.
what is your. now we've seen the entries.
no, there are two broad arguments, my lord.
one is. what is theoretical structure that you are saying?
first we say, first we say, my lord.
anything else you want us to? let's complete the entries.
yes, then have. kindly have entry 6.
of? list ii. public health and sanitation, hospitals and dispensaries.
omit the rest, take public health into consideration.
and then 8. word is, 'intoxicating liquors.' now, that is to say, is an illustrative.
illustration of what follows. that intoxicating liquor.
in relation to that production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase, sale of intoxicating liquors.
the question is, what is the term, 'intoxicating liquor' stand for?
and this term has abundant legislative history, which we call the legal sense.
so, the question is, when your lordships are considering this term, my request
would be your lordships will have to place your lordships in the positions
of the framers and see how they saw this term at that point
of time, what the law was, what was the legal history, the legal sense.
it is not always that in terms of the legislative power, your
lordships have relied upon the popular and the common-sense point of view.
because more often than not, the entries have entirely different.
any other entries that we have missed or that's now the sum total?
yes.
now, my lord, the next entry in the state list, which i would
pray lordship may have apart from what lordships have seen, entry 51, list.
it says, 'duties of excise on the following goods, manufactured or
produced in the state and countervailing duties at the same or
lower rates on similar goods, manufactured or produced elsewhere in india.'
so, duties of excise on the following goods: a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption.
is it same as intoxicating liquor?
that's the question which your lordships would have to deal with, right.
because why would framers use different words in two different entries?
and the reason my answer is the legislative history is there.
that is why. is there any liquor which is not intoxicating?
i don't think so. at least, i have not experienced.
depends on the consumer, i suppose. it depends on the person who drinks it.
that would be the strength of the effect.
but effect will be there. all liquids containing alcohol, they are intoxicating.
i can't imagine of a liquor which is not intoxicating, be it industrial alcohol.
of course, intoxicating means alcoholic content. industrial alcohol has higher alcoholic content, that's all.
it can't be had as it is.
but then, do we have whiskey as it is?
we have it with soda or water, normally.
that again depends. neat, we must say.
for that matter, some people do have neat liquor.
but then, that's what i'm trying to explain, the neat
liquor is also, more often than not, mixed with ice cubes.
it's not a constitutional issue.
no, but it has been, my lord kindly have article 47.
kindly have article 47.
it says, 'state can prohibit consumption of alcoholic drinks.' so,
whenever they refer to beverage form or something that can
be had as it is, neat, as lord justice has said.
there article 47 refers to that as intoxicating drink.
so, whole lot of different phrases have been used in different entries.
there has to be some purpose behind it.
and that is what my endeavour would be to show why.
but in any case, at least one assumption i can make is when
we read entry 51, list ii, when it says alcoholic liquor for human consumption.
there is one reason, possibly, why they said.
otherwise, liquors would have been sufficient. why do they use intoxicating liquor?
that is a question which legal history.
legal, the state of law, which preceded our constitution as necessary, that indicates.
as mr. datar will tell you, if you go down south
or mr. giri will tell you that even when somebody serves
you coffee, they'll ask you, do you want to have the liquor?
when you have the coffee liquor, it's not the decoction.
the decoction is very often referred to as a liquor, but it's not intoxicating liquor.
coffee liquor. coffee powder is mixed with chicory.
different decoction. it has been carried on for some generation.
so it's liquor, but it's not the intoxicating liquor.
we have a history in our country of alcohol.
it's not alcohol, but it's still referred to as liquor.
not when we are talking of whiskey and
liquor, the coffee liquor seems to be little.
i know. coffee liquor is very different.
that is liquor. yeah. spirits. it is spirits.
my real problem in this matter is, what is the
learned attorney general going to argue when you people are done?
the bigger problem would be what most of
your lordship would do without understanding what liquor is?
that would be a bigger problem.
the attorney's whole argument is going to be purely theoretical.
attorney, you have an uphill task. let him have liquor, my lord.
he will conquer the hill. some of us can do it more impartially.
we know nothing about liquor, nothing more.
kerala high court. impact on hatcheries.
because 301, 304 etc. chief justice dattu asked me,
mr. venkataramani, how much did you know about chickens?
so i said, i don't know, but the internal
motion, but i know there's motions from state to state.
so, that's talking about coffee. the kumbakonam degree coffee, which is the highest coffee.
yes. there's a very important question. liquor other than intoxication and intoxicating liquor.
that's the secret of entry 8.
attorney doesn't sound very convincing with regard to coffee liquor.
he must graduate onto the liquor part.
yes, mr. dwivedi. now coming back to the.
kindly have. your lordship has seen it's a taxing entry, entry 51, list ii.
and duties of excise, which means tax on production and manufacture.
now the parallel entry is there in the union list, entry 84.
now my lordship would have to see it before the amendment because now 2016.
gst, et cetera has really spoiled the shape of the entries.
page 2016. it would be there in the footnote.
yes, we got it in the footnote.
you have to thank mr. sankaranarayanan for producing this masterpiece.
no, that's page 471. now kindly juxtapose this entry 51 with entry 84.
the parallel of this entry in the union list
because for tax purpose it seems framers divided this thing.
alcoholic liquor for human consumption and alcoholic liquor not for human consumption.
so liquor was divided into two categories.
now coming back to entry 51 again.
now with due respect i'm sorry, there's something which i should have pointed out earlier.
it contains two items. three items, in fact.
your lordship would see alcoholic liquors for human consumption, that's one item.
the other item is opium, indian hemp etc. and the
third item is medicinal and toilet preparations which are in
the exclusion clause, but not including medicinal toilet preparations containing alcohol.
so all these cough syrups which have alcohol, will go to the centre?
for tax. for tax. for tax.
but the interesting part, which i wanted to really emphasize here is,
there is no regulatory entry in any of the lists either specifying
the word, 'industrial alcohol' or stating alcoholic liquors not for human consumption.
there is no legislative entry in any of the list, list i or iii.
so does it mean that industrial alcohol is not meant for human consumption?
obviously my lord, it can't be had, because the
strength of the liquor is 95%, 97%, 90% to 95%.
yes. which is dangerous for health.
mr. dwivedi, you just said no regulatory entry
in any list using the phrase, industrial alcohol or?
the 'or' i missed out. or alcoholic liquor not for human consumption.
i can understand, if the idea was to regulate these two.
tax these two. then there should be some regulatory provision somewhere.
intoxicating liquor is one such entry, your lordships may keep it in mind.
but apart from that, there is no entry to
regulate industrial alcohol or alcoholic liquors not for human consumption.
and more importantly, if your lordships would see medicinal and toilet preparations
containing alcohol, there is no legislative entry in any of the lists.
and the question therefore, which comes to my mind, which
i placed before your lordship and i'll try to answer that.
why?
taxing entry only regulates part of it, the help intoxicating liquor or
alcoholic liquor but the rest of the parts are where, we don't know.
we have to speculate. synthetics puts it in entry 52 because of idr.
now, if we put it in entry 52, then obvious
thing would be, that it goes to entry 24 then.
because you can't pick up from any other entry
excepting 24, so far as the industry is concerned.
so if we place it in entry 52,
then pugnacity, it must go to entry 24.
but medicinal preparations containing alcohol will go to list i?
no. but which entry? entry 97. no, i'll answer that.
i'll answer that.
if entry 97 has been determined to be so
huge, and what was the point in having these entries?
they could have just said list ii and iii, entry 97.
it would have included everything. but the medicinal preparation containing alcohol, then the duty of.
power to levy duty of excise, where will that go, according to you?
no, duty of excise is there, entry 84.
right. entry 84, list i, it clearly includes.
unamended. it includes.
so that's what i am saying, my lord, the idea is to have
these items as separate items, but for tax only, but not for regulation.
so entry 84 will cover medicinal preparation which have alcohol?
for taxation. act, of course. yes.
so what appears, apparently is that until, unless we look into the legislative
history of this word, 'intoxicating liquor', and the laws pertaining to alcoholic liquors.
now, we have seen the entire gamut of entries, right?
my lord. now, why don't you formulate what your points are?
yes. once we do that, we'll go to synthetics and see.
it's not a very long matter. it will have to trace the legislative.
obviously, but why don't you formulate it?
no, we'll look at the legislative history of intoxicating liquors,
but now you can just formulate what your submissions are.
yes. the first question again is, as i pointed out.
you've made a note at page 29.
59, yes. pdf page 30. but now why don't you formulate what your points are?
my lord, the first question, which i'm going to canvas for your lordship is, that
entry 8, list ii, which confers exclusive jurisdiction on the states to regulate industrial alcohol.
which confers exclusive.
jurisdiction on the states to regulate industrial alcohol,
because industrial alcohol is part of intoxicating liquor.
so, the scope of entry 8. industrial alcohol is part of intoxicating liquor?
liquor. and therefore, states have exclusive jurisdiction.
so, your first submission is, entry 8 of list ii confers exclusive jurisdiction
on states to regulate industrial alcohol because industrial alcohol is part of intoxicating liquor.
liquor. intoxicating liquor, your lordship may note it down.
intoxicating liquor is a general term. yes.
unlimited. it has not been restricted by any phrases, before or after.
is a general term. unrestricted, by any other entry.
unlike 24. to put it in a better form, it's a specific entry.
industry is a general entry.
this is a specific entry, which at least
three constitution benches of lordships have held that to.
this intoxicating liquor is a general term unrestricted by any other entry.
entry and perhaps, lord, it's a special entry in state
list as compared to entry 24 which is a general entry.
industry can include any industry. but if, your lordship would see entry 8.
it says production, manufacture, sale, purchase, everything is there.
it includes virtual every activity relating to intoxicating.
and in mcdowell's case, lordships have held this very clearly, that it's
a special entry as compared to industry, which is a general entry.
for instance, your lordships may have a look at.
i'm sorry. entry 25, list ii.
if i may place now, entry 25, list ii says gas and gas works.
that's an industry.
but the question which i'm posing is, does it fall under word, 'industry' then?
if there is a specific entry which has been carved out of the word, 'industry'.
entry 24 cannot be deemed to include gas and gas works.
because if 'industry' was wide enough to include gas and
gas works, then what was the point in having it there?
it can't by interpretation, make the entry redundant.
likewise, entry 8 is a special entry as compared to the general entry, industry.
entry 24. could the power to legislate on industrial alcohol.
because that is to say, kindly, have the elaborateness of the illustrative part, that
is to say, is an illustrative word, but get the elaborateness of the illustrative part.
it says, 'production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale of intoxicating
liquor.' what else is left then apart from this, i ask myself?
it's a complete entry. which completes. which includes every aspect of industry.
intoxicating liquor.
though i have to answer that question whether intoxicating liquor is wide or not.
no, the question is whether intoxicating liquor would include industrial alcohol?
that is the question. that's the question.
and for that, one of the aspects which i had indicated and emphasized.
wouldn't we postulate something which is for human consumption by its very nature.
that's one way of looking at it.
as i said, this is an entry which is general and uncontrolled.
now, intoxicating can mean intoxicate, causing intoxication to the humans.
it can also mean a liquor which contains intoxicating element which can cause intoxication.
so to confine this entry to only that aspect that it may cause
intoxication to humans when it is had as it is, as a drink.
intoxicating drink. can we have article 47 for a moment?
the purpose of industrial alcohol is never to intoxicate.
that's why alcohol is a completely different.
i'll answer that question, it is. the ordinary use of the article must be seen.
my lord, the term industrial alcohol. let us not confuse the two things.
it may not be fit for human consumptions as it is.
there's no difficulty. but to say that it is not intoxicating, that is not correct.
because it has alcohol. it has high quantity of alcohol.
therefore, it is intoxicating.
we are attributing this term, 'intoxication' to humans only, that
may not be correct, considering the wide entry that it is.
and a general entry, which is unrestricted.
because if it was only human consumption then entry 51 explained it.
so why use the different phraseology? the phraseology would have been there in entry 8.
alcoholic liquor for human consumption, that is to say.
framers would not use two entirely different phrases for denoting the same thing.
that's one aspect which i have. and i will show.
because if you see entry 84, clause a, as it
then fit, duties of excise on tobacco and other goods
manufactured or produced in india, except (a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption.
there only the state can levy. levy duty.
yes. so again, the phrase is alcoholic liquor for human consumption.
now, my question to myself is that, if alcoholic liquor for human consumption was
a set phrase used by the framers to denote alcoholic drinks or beverage form
or which can be had by the humans, then the same phraseology should have
been there in entry 8, if the idea was to indicate the same thing.
and there is a reason why it is not so.
because as i said, legislative history is very critical in this regard.
what you are looking at it is, if it is a declared industry,
then obviously the state will not have any jurisdictions with regard to it.
then only the centre can have the jurisdiction over that entry.
there's no difficulty.
but the question which i had posed before your lordship was, if intoxicating
liquor falls under entry 8, then it is not an industry under entry 24.
and if it is not an industry under 24, then it cannot be taken over
under idr, because then the parliament would be determining the scope of the legislative entry.
we have entry 24 which says in list ii, industries subject
to the provisions of entry 7 and 52 of list i.
so therefore, word 'industry' cannot include word 'intoxicating liquor', 'manufacturer of
intoxicating liquor', because both are separate entries specified in the state list only.
one is special, the other is general.
the special has been carved out, as i
cited the example of gas and gas works.
your lordships would recall calcutta gas case but your
lordships specifically said it's a special entry, gas works.
intoxicating liquor. mr. dwivedi, i've formulated your third point like this.
entry 51 and entry 54 of list ii
use the expression, 'alcoholic liquor for human consumption'.
entry 8 of list ii would have used
the same phrase, if the framers so intended.
but entry 8, list ii uses a wider phrase, namely, 'intoxicating liquors'.
if intoxicating liquor falls under entry 8 of list ii,
it does not fall under entry 24 of list ii
and is therefore not subject to entry 52 of list ii.
union cannot drag it to list i. that's your.
so, really speaking, i think what we now have to focus on
is, what do the constitution mean when they use the expression 'intoxicating
liquors.' and let's look at the legislative background of the use of the expression.
because mr. dwivedi then, everything really either your argument,
either falls or survives on the content of entry 8.
does entry 8 intoxicating liquor include as industrial alcohol?
absolutely. that's the right.
but the alternative argument is, that even if industry is, the second question,
which i am formulating is, that even if word, 'industry' includes industrial alcohol.
even if industry.? word 'industry' includes industrial alcohol.
in entry 52? first it has to include in entry 24.
right. so alternatively, even if industry in entry 24.
then only it can be taken over under entry 52.
no, we are just formulating it.
i want to understand your point of view, alternative view.
right. but if we. one second. let's just hold the thought down.
i am sorry. alternatively, even if industry in entry 24 or entry 51.
52, list 1. 52 of list i includes.
industrial alcohol. industrial alcohol. then? then whatever goes to list i is the manufacture.
what? manufacture of industrial alcohol.
and once the industrial alcohol as product to be
notified in industry emerges, it goes to entry 33.
the product is not included in entry 24 or 52.
so, what is included in industry and not the product, that's what you are saying?
not the product.
my lord, it has been well defined, there are at
least seven constitution benches, which say word, 'industry' only denotes manufacture.
it does not include trade, commerce or production, supply and distribution.
word, 'production' has been brought out of caution.
it has been used, but manufacture goes to industry.
actually, so even if we reject your point on intoxicating liquor covering industrial alcohol,
the alternative limb, which frankly appears to be more acceptable, the alternative limb, the alternative.
but you may be right, because we have not looked still at the legislative history.
your lordship would look at it in the sense of a timeline my lord, perhaps,
not the alternative may appear to be the easier one to go to and decide.
something which is pending for 14 years, there's no timeline.
we have to look at both aspects.
but that's why your second limb is that even assuming
it's industry within entry 24, and therefore, under entry 52,
only the manufacture falls within entry 52 of list i. product goes.
the rest of the product is governed by entry 33, and
if it falls in entry 33, then you can levy fees under.
but the jurisdiction doesn't arise, my lord.
right. jurisdiction of state doesn't arise. jurisdiction is there.
because you can levy fees then, fees in respect of any of the entries.
if we come to the conclusion about the jurisdiction part, then
what can be the ambit of jurisdiction is a separate issue.
which that can be adverted to, and the disputes will arise,
they can keep on coming off and on and can be answered.
but the issue is of state's jurisdiction, whether it
is there or not, to regulate and control industrial alcohol.
now, another interesting aspect here would be.
we have. if i may answer here?
i could be over hear.
so, these are the four submissions or there are alternative submissions?
the b part of that last argument is, that
state will only have jurisdiction if the field is unoccupied.
under entry 33. under entry 33. so, article 254 comes in.
and we have expressly stated that till date there is no legislation by the union.
because under the idr act, section 18-g, is there.
if i may place that, lordship, may have a look at it.
this would be the last limb, section 18-g of the idr act.
so, what is the submission? section 18-g, how do you formulate it?
then we look at it.
section 18-g confers an enabling power on the
union to regulate the products of the notified industries.
for securing equitable distribution and availability at fair price, they can regulate.
and that regulation has to be through an
order issued by the central government, a notified order.
it's like a control order.
so, union has to regulate by a notified order providing for regulation.
section 18-g, we have got it on the screen here.
it will be on the screen. yes.
section 18-g is in volume iv, page is yours a pdf, page 577.
now, this section 18-g is traceable to entry 33, list iii.
'the central government, so far as it appears to it to be necessary
or experienced for securing the equitable distribution and availability at fair price or
any article or class of articles relatable to any scheduled industry may, notwithstanding
anything contained in any other provision of this act by notified order.' so,
may be notified order, provide for regulating the
supply and distribution thereof and trade and commerce therein.
so, it has to be a notified order?
it has to be a notified.
because if i recall correctly, i have listed
and i'll get it, get hold of it.
chief justice has in one of the judgment-254 has
said there has to be, in fact, an order there.
it has to be real conflict, has to be actual conflict.
not supposed conflict that's in future order may be issued and then conflict may arise.
so, there has to be a real conflict,
actual conflict before jurisdiction can be taken away.
that's in the case of context of occupied field.
the field is occupied only when there is an order under 18-g.
as my friend rightly says that under 254, state can
still legislate and get the presidential assent to override them.
yes. but that's a different issue. i would not.
but then that is, at least that indicates
that the field has to be actually occupied.
and there is no notified order by them?
there. at least, i could not discover any notified order.
my friend has also asserted that and in response my lord, in
their written submission they don't say that there is a notified order.
they say that it's not required. right.
now, if my lordships would come to my written submissions.
may i take your lordships to my written submissions?
now my lords, there's one provision which i perhaps
should have also cited but i forgot to do that.
your lordships may have article 47, which also has some bearing on our question.
though this is non-enforceable, it does not impose any restriction
on the legislative power but it certainly gives an indication.
'the state shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and standard of
living of its people and the improvement of public health as among its primary
duties. and in particular, the state shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of consumption
except for medicinal purpose of intoxicating drinks.' so where they wanted to restrict to
beverage form, which is had as it is, they used a term, 'intoxicating drinks.' consumption.
this shows in the beverage form it is there as intoxicating drink in the constitution.
the framers recognized it as such but then
equated with intoxicating liquor again becomes a little difficult.
now, my lord.
now that you've formulated, now let's go to the legislative
history, and then the few places you want to start.
i think maybe by lunch, we should be done with your submission by then.
about an hour and seven minutes.
i don't think, it has taken nearly hour and
a half to elaborate on the entries over here.
now what is the gist of the point?
now, we just rapid fire with your.
we're supporting your submissions. i would only request is, it's an important issue.
then where rapid fire may lead or may
lead to leaving out something which is important.
and that is what happens.
the rapid fire happened in synthetics too, as a
consequence of which lots of things didn't come there.
mr. dwivedi, the chief justice has to always say that, not because it's going
to be enforced but because the clock on the other side constantly stares at us.
at the very initial state, i had said if your
lordships are going to determine this scope of the argument
in terms of timeline, then perhaps, i will have lots of difficulty.
in lines now because there's so much of work.
so many. no, but for such an issue which is there rankling since 1951.
this is an issue decided for the first time in '51 and since
then it continued for 38. the reason for the reference and everything is
not because it is so complex or something, but because perceptions change. our
perception of what india is today is very different from the perception which
judges had in 1950 or 1960. there's a
new dimension to states right as federalism has progressed.
a lot of reasons why we continually look, re-look at our judgments.
there are two answers to it, there are two answers to it.
so there are written submissions now, directly.
yes, yes. but before that, there are two answers to it.
federalism concept is to my aid.
the other thing is the evolution takes place, new things are discovered, new things happen.
but then what lordships have said that the legislative entries must be
interpreted in an expansive manner to include the new things and new situations.
but that doesn't mean that the old gets lost.
the old will be there, plus additionally, this will come.
submission. yes.
and see how you are first and foremost saying that entry 8 covers intoxicating liquor.
that's the first major submission, which you have, and the second is in the alternative.
now, kindly come to my written submissions.
volume i(a), page 2. page 2.
at the bottom, lordship would notice there is
a word, 'intoxicating liquor' under 8, list ii.
have lordships got?
'it is important to note that the word industrial alcohol, ia for short, is
nowhere used in any of the lists. entry 8, list ii only uses the
phrase intoxicating liquor, which has a rich and deep history and the legislative practice
accompanying it. it is therefore, relevant to notice the history behind this phrase. it
has been repeatedly held that the legislative entries are fields of legislation and therefore.'.
my lordships, this principle is well known.
but the first principle is well known, so i need not take your lordships' time.
then that second aspect is also well known.
then the third aspect, the important part in this is,
that there is a necessity starts with the context, contextual
interpretation out of necessity starts with historical perspective, particularly, the legislative practice.
that is what we call legal sense.
now there, there is one decision which i really wanted
to place before your lordship, if your lordship would permit?
(1959) 1 scr 379 and the relevant pages are.
1959?
'59, volume i scr 379, age 390 to 391. then 397 to 413. this decision
is not 51. 1 scr is in volume v(b), page 481. pdf page 486. volume
v(b)? v(b). my lord, the reason why i want to cite this judgment this is.
v(b). on what proposition do you cite it? yes. in this case, the real dispute
was with regard to tax on sale of goods. so, question arose, what is the
meaning of the term, 'sale of goods' as understood by the framers or the lawmakers?
this was a case under 1935 act, therefore, the entry was the same.
they said what is. so, what were they told?
their lordships, not debated the question whether we should adopt the popular sense or
the common-sense point of view with respect to legislative entry, or we should adopt
a sense which is in conformity with the
legislative practice, which they call the legal sense.
and eventually, after considering everything and lots of judgments, both the us
supreme court in british matters, privy counsel and all, they came to
the conclusion that the real meaning can be derived after looking into
the legal history, that is the legal sense, not the popular sense.
that's not always correct. from legal history, yes.
how this have been used even before the adoption of that entry in.
because what they said a lot of.
government of india. quite right. and what their lordship said.
that your lordships would have to sit in the position of
the framers and see what the law was and in what sense.
mr. dwivedi, i don't think we need to labour that point really.
let's go. this is what i wanted to rely on this.
this is absolutely perfect.
and '51 therefore, supreme court scr, the one above balasara. this is (1951) scr,
682. yes. this is balsara versus state of bombay or state of bombay versus
balsara. where do we find it in the volumes? volume v(b)? volume v(b). v(b),
right? volume v. volume v. page 1718. and what does it say? i mean,
you can just formulate it for us. in balsara, the question of course, the
case was with regard to potable liquor. yes. but
they considered the history of the term, 'intoxicating liquor.
' i think balsara, we may have to look at.
yes.
they consider the entire history of intoxicating liquor from the british position to
government of india because government of india has an act of british parliament.
i think balsara we may see, no. it's regarding portable liquor.
and then this intoxicating liquor would include all kinds of liquors, including industrial alcohol.
i know there is a difficulty. i have it in scr form.
your lordships have it, perhaps in air form.
now, everybody should cite scr because we have a digi scr in place now.
quite right. so, i have it in the scr form your lordships have.
it is 1951. 32? scr. 1951 scr, page 682.
you can load it for us on the digi scr.
you can load it on the screen.
that's the official report. yes, you know you have given scr online.
and this further went to the extent of saying even
in medicinal preparations containing alcohol would come under intoxicating liquor.
which are the relevant paragraphs?
yes, but actually i am from scr, i can give
you lots of relevant pages, but i can't give the relevant.
can you just load it for us on our
screen so that we can both follow, both the.
woh kar lo. digi scr kar lo.
it has to go to? yes.
kindly notice the question here which arose, page 685 and 686.
question is with regard to, obviously, as i said, it
was against the direction of the prohibition commissioner of bombay prohibiting.
so, where do you want us to go to now?
kindly have the next page, 686. the second paragraph.
the act in question was passed by the legislature of the province of bombay.
this was an act under government of india act, 1949 act.
therefore, government of india act and the entry was entry
31 which is in the same terms as entry 8.
which page do you want us to go to now?
look go where they discuss liquor and intoxicating liquor.
that's page 703. 'the high court has held that the word, liquor.', starts like that.
before that lordship may have a look at the entry.
entry 31 is at page 690. it says entry 31, list ii.
intoxicating liquors and narcotic drugs, that is to say, production, manufacturer,
possession, transport, purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors, opium so and so.
we are not concerned with opium, but 'intoxicating liquor' was the word they have used.
now coming to page 703 and this law was claimed to have been
made under entry 31, list ii of the government of india act 1935.
slightly above this is the definition of 'liquor'.
oxford english dictionary. earlier just slightly earlier.
liquor includes spirit of wine, etc. just above this paragraph starting from,
'high court has held.' 'the high court has held that the word.'.
may i?
but in the bombay act, perhaps, there was the definition of the word, liquor
which included spirits of wine, with ethylated spirit and all liquids consisting of alcohol.
then the answer is given by the high court, which is page 703.
'the high court has held that the word liquor , ordinarily, means a
strong drink as opposed to soft drink, but it must, in any event,
be a beverage which is ordinarily drunk. proceeding upon this view, the high
court has held that, although, the legislature may while legislating under entry 31
prevent the consumption of non-intoxicating beverages and also prevent the use as drinks
of alcoholic liquids which are not normally consumed as drinks, it cannot prevent
the legislature the legitimate use of alcoholic preparations, which are not beverages, nor
the use of medicinal toilet preparations containing alcohol. this view of the high
court was very strongly supported in the one hand and equally strongly challenged
on the other, before us. and i therefore, proceed to
deal.' now then, your lordships go to the dictionary meaning.
in the oxford english dictionary, edited by james murray, several meanings are
given to the word, liquor , of which the following may be quoted.
liquor, a liquid matter in a liquid state, in wider sense a fluid.
a liquid or a prepared solution used as a wash
or bath and in many processes in the industrial parts.
liquid for drinking beverage drink, now, almost exclusively a drink produced by
a fermentation or distillation, malt liquor, liquor brewed from malt, ale, beer,
water etc. the water in which meat has been boiled, both sauce,
the fat in which bacon, fish or the like has been fried, the liquid containing.
the liquid produced by infusion.
my lordship, may i omit the rest and come to the next page?
thus, according to the dictionary, the word, liquor may have a general meaning
in the sense of a liquid, or it may have a special meaning,
which is the third meaning assigned to it in the extract quoted above.
vis-a-vis a drink or beverage produced by fermentation or distillation.
the latter is, undoubtedly, the popular and the most widely accepted meaning of
the and the basic idea of beverage seems rather prominent to run through
the main provisions of the various acts of this country, as well as
america and england relating to intoxicating liquor to which our attention was drawn.
but at the same time on the reference to these very acts,
it is difficult to hold that they deal exclusively with beverages and
are not applicable to certain articles which are, strictly speaking, not beverages.
a few instances will make the point clear.
in the national prohibition act 1909 of america, the word liquor and intoxicating liquor
are used as having the same meaning and the definition states that these words
shall be construed to include alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin, bear, ale, potter wine.
and in addition, there to any spirituous malt or fermented liquor,
liquid and compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, proprietary patented or not and
by whatever name called, containing one half of 1% of more
or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use as beverage purpose.
having defined liquor intoxicating liquor rather widely, the volstead act accepted denatured
alcohol, medicinal preparations, toilet and antiseptic preparations, flavouring extracts and syrups, vinegar
and preserved sweet cider which suggests that they were included in the definition.
in some of these items, we have the
qualifying words unfit for use for beverage purposes.
but the heading of the section 4 of volstead
act under which these exceptions are enumerated, the exempted liquors.
' mr. dwivedi, if you go to para 40.
i mean, we are in para 44, which says coming now to the various definitions.
middle of that para. yes.
if you go to middle of that para, even if, we exclude the american
and english acts from our consideration, we find that all the provincial acts of
this country have consistently included liquids containing alcohol
in the definition of liquor, an intoxicating liquor.
may i place it to your lordship?
yeah, you can just read from there.
'even if we.' 'in the bengal excise act.' no, no,
no the para is, 'coming now to the various definitions.' alright.
'coming down to the.' middle of that para.
middle of the para. correct, correct. i have it.
'even if we', 'even if we'. 'coming now to the definition.' just skip that.
'even if we exclude the american, english acts.' that's the ratio.
but kindly have it from report my lord, because it refers to the local act.
not necessary.
the formulation is, even if we exclude the american that's what we are relying on.
no, they were relying upon indian acts too earlier.
that's not necessary now. just go to 'even if we'.
'even if we exclude the american and english acts from our consideration, we
find that all the provincial acts of this country have consistently included liquids
containing alcohol in the definition of liquor and intoxicating liquor. the framers of
the government of india act 1935 could not have been entirely ignorant of
the accepted sense in which the word liquor has been used in the
various excise acts of this country, and accordingly, i consider the appropriate conclusion
to be that the word liquor covers not only those alcoholic liquids which
are generally used for beverage purposes and produce intoxication, but also, all liquids
containing alcohol.' it may be that the latter meaning is not the meaning
which is attributed to the word 'liquor' in common parliament,
especially when that word is prefixed by the qualifying word 'intoxicating'.
but in my opinion, i think regards to the numerous statutory definitions of
the word such a meaning could not have been intended to be excluded
from the scope of the term 'intoxicating liquor' used in entry 31 of list ii.
my lord, this is entry 31 is entry 8 of the constitution.
is entry 8.
now my lord, to kind of corroborate this reasoning,
if your lordship, would come to my written submissions.
i have extracted all the definitions of liquor in the local acts.
and these are all of i think 1951.
do you have more on this judgment that you want
to or this is the point you want to make?
that's the point which i have. okay, then we will close this judgement now.
what is the next point?
no, kindly come to the page 8 of my written submissions.
alright, we will.
there i have extracted the definitions of liquor, intoxicating liquor, alcoholic
liquor and so on so forth, but lot flows from that.
page 8 of my written submissions. page 8.
yes.
so, these are the backdrops under basis of which entry 31 of
government of india act was enacted and that was borrowed by the constitution.
page 8. first is bombay abkari act 1878.
liquor includes spirits of wine with highlighted spirit which is not potable, it's poisonous.
my lord. spirits, spirits is defined later on, my lord, i'll show that.
means 'any liquor containing alcohol and obtained by distillation,
whether it is denatured or not', that's the important part.
so, they were quite conscious of the fact that
there is something like denatured spirit which is not potable.
and then section 350, lordships, may have little below that, excisable article uses the phrase,
because excise able article means and includes, any liquor or intoxicating drink as herein defined.
then my lord, madras akbari act again, 'spirit means any liquor
containing alcohol and obtained by distillation, whether it is denatured or
not.' then kindly turnover to the next page 39, definition of word 'liquor'.
'liquor includes spirits of wine, methylated spirits, spirits, wine, toddy, beer
and all liquids consisting of or containing alcohol.' then excisable article.
'any alcoholic liquor for human consumption.' now my lord, the distinction is
made here from 'liquor' and 'alcoholic liquor for human consumption' for tax purpose.
then this is followed in the next act also, the bengal act.
'any liquor for human consumption, excisable article, any liquor for human consumption, it follows the
same pattern.' and then my lord, it defines in section 2, intoxicant means any liquor.
lordship may leave the rest.
kindly see section 214, 'liquor', means liquid consisting of or containing alcohol and
includes spirits of wine, spirits, wine, taadi, bachwai, don't go over the rest.
section 219, 'spirit' means any liquor containing alcohol
obtained by distillation, whether it is denatured or not.
' then bihar act follows the same pattern.
these are around the same vintage, excisable article, any alcoholic liquor for human consumption.
section 214 defines liquor, includes all liquids consisting or containing alcohol and then spirit
means any liquor containing alcohol obtained by distillation, whether it is denatured or not.
then comes the mp excise act, which is same vintage, the same pattern.
alcoholic liquor for human consumption so far as the excise duty is concerned.
liquor defined widely includes all spirits, all liquids consisting or containing
alcohol and then spirit is defined as widely, including denatured spirit also.
so spirit is part of liquor and the denatured spirit is also part of liquor.
likewise, when we come to punjab act which
applied to delhi, haryana, himachal pradesh and all these.
here, there is an interesting thing which comes in now.
section 214,' liquor means intoxicating liquor and includes all liquids consisting of or containing alcohol.
' omit the rest, my lord.
'spirit means any liquor containing alcohol obtained by distillation, whether denatured or not.' so in
other words, even denatured spirit was part of intoxicating liquor and liquor means intoxicating liquor.
both are equated. then the same pattern is followed in the chhattisgarh act of 1950.
for tax purpose, alcoholic liquor for human consumption is used.
section 213 defines liquor.
'liquor means intoxicating liquor and includes spirits of wine, spirit, all liquids
consisting or containing alcohol.' then spirit is defined to include even denatured spirit.
again, my lords, up excise act of the same
vintage, follows the same pattern, exactly the same pattern.
your contention is that all liquid containing alcohol.
was part of intoxicating liquor. .is part of intoxicating liquor.
and not only that, with due respect, my lords
may see that page 7 of my written submissions.
pdf page 8. there is something more to be said.
and i'm only basing this on the fact that we have followed
the government of india act 1935, which is an act of british parliament.
so therefore, the pattern and thinking would be the same as it
was there and if in 31 that was the concept, then that
has to be the same in the constitution, because framers adopted the same.
now, the legislative, may i place it?
the legislative.
page 7 of my written submissions 'the legislative practice leads us to british
position and therefore to laws prevailing, therein. license consolidation act of 1910, section
110, spirits act 1910, section 3, 4, 5 and 6.' now, the license
consolidation act not uses the term 'spirit' as well as 'intoxicating liquor' for licensing.
then, these excise acts have come.
mr. dwivedi, the liquor will include all liquid containing alcohol.
no doubt about it.
because when the legislature or the constitution uses
the expression 'liquor', it means all liquid containing alcohol.
but when the word 'liquor' is qualified by the
word 'intoxicating', does that make any difference to that?
exactly, my lord. this is what.
no, does intoxicating liquor also mean all liquor containing
alcohol, which would include all liquids containing denatured spirit, also?
that's your contention. yes, because every liquid containing alcohol is included as intoxicating liquor.
intoxicating liquor means liquor.
liquor means intoxicating liquor, that is evident from the pattern of these acts.
when. no, but liquor by itself would mean any liquid containing alcohol.
sorry? any intoxicating.
my lord, what, perhaps, is pointed out is that, perhaps, there
can be a drug in a liquid form which may be intoxicative.
so therefore, it can be a liquid containing intoxicant.
the word 'intoxicant' was wider.
intoxicating does not mean that it has to be capable of human consumption.
it indicates the potentiality of the item, that there
is alcohol in it and therefore, it is intoxicating.
it can mean both, something had as it is, as well as, as
a beverage or as well as liquid containing alcohol, because that is intoxicated.
my lord, once let's take the instance of the country liquor.
a country liquor is extremely common all around the world, in most
of the states and is the highest revenue churner in the states, perhaps.
now, what is country liquor?
if i may place before your lordships, that chart we
had prepared to explain to your lordships the term 'intoxicating liquor'?
rectified spirit. actually, the base is the rectified spirit.
lord, he's.
lord, in the most convenient form, we have tried to explain the process
that will help in understanding of the commodity with which we are dealing.
mr. dwivedi, can we sort of.
you are showing us the definitions of the excise act, various states.
so, as the chief justice just said, all liquid containing alcohol will come within that.
now, whether it brings joy to the human, it must bring joy to the revenue.
is that what you're trying to say?
it does bring quite a joy to the revenue my lord, because most of
the states would try to apply, prohibition failed and had to reverse their policies.
so, it is really joyous for the state to have,
and liquor is really flogged as the most avenue generating device.
there's no doubt about in our country.
and therefore, every state wants to control it.
but the important part is your lordship will see, the
chart which we have indicated, the process of manufacturing spirit.
'it is a heavy, dark coloured, viscous liquid,
molasses, because that's the basic raw material, molasses.
it is the heavy, dark coloured, viscous liquid produced in the
final stage of manufacturing of sugar and it is the byproduct
in the sugar industry and raw material for the manufacturing of alcohol.
' now how does it happen? fermentation.
'firstly, the viscous liquid obtained from the sugar industry is mixed with water
and yeast. it is also added to convert the fermentable sugars present in
the molasses into alcohol. but the process of fermentation, a saccharine solution is
obtained which is also known as fermented wash. in the fermented wash of
paint during this process only 10 to 11% alcohol is generated in the
total volume. fermented wash is conveyed from the wash backs to the stilts
columns in closed pipes. in the process of separating ethyl alcohol from the
fermented wash and in this process, various components of the mixture are separated
by virtue of their difference in boiling points. during the process of distillation,
impurities like acetaldehyde, fused oil, impure spirits which are not fit for human
consumption are removed. the product comes to be rectified spirit having strength of
91% to 95% after the process of distillation.' now, this is
my lord, ethyl spirit or the rectified spirit, as we call it.
redistillation.
'in order to further remove the impurities, the redistillation is done. after redistillation, the product
comes to be extra neutral alcohol having strength of 95% to 97% volume by volume,
meaning thereby out of 100 litres of ena, 95% to 97 is alcohol. this distilled
liquor can be aged or unaged to produce potable alcohol. for aged distilled liquor, maturation
is required. for unaged distilled liquor, no maturation is required. vodka, gin, country liquor are
examples where maturation is not required. this fact really shows that the liquor before maturation
is also fit for human consumption.' now there are two columns my lord, the maturation.
'for maturing of imfl, indian made foreign liquor, maturation is only to improve the
quality of alcohol and in this process, ena is stored in the wooden wax
for the period of one year or two years or five years, ten years,
twelve years and eighteen years in which chemical changes occur during storage, as the
spirit in the container moves back and forth through the wood. the ingredients, including
flavouring compounds are extracted from the wood and
carried back into the container's contents on its own.
' now their column is my lords, will
see the rectified spirit which i was talking to.
'after distillation nor redistillation, the extra neutral alcohol becomes fit for human consumption. one
is required to add only demineralized water into ena having strength of 95% to
97% volume by volume. in india, country liquor is manufactured simply by adding demineralized
water essence plus caramel into the ena to bring its strength to 25%.' so,
you dilute it, because it can't be had
as it is, it will really burn your intestines.
to bring its strength to 25% volume by volume for
plain country spirit and to 36% for manufacturing of spice
country spirit, for preparation of whether, this is important my lord.
'since ena is fit for human consumption, it is also used for the purposes
of preparation of medicines.' nowadays, what is interesting is to see there are liquors
of all kinds which are potable, like for instance, whiskeys and vodkas and all that.
they go up to 72%, 57, 60%, 72%.
recently i discovered potable liquor consisting of 92%.
so as your lordship said, as the time
passes, new things come in, new concepts emerge.
people keep on experimenting. they want the strongest drink possible.
therefore, they get it.
the second aspect of it is important, if your lordships
would turn to the page 7 of my written submissions.
because there are blended whiskeys, there are single malts.
addition of demineralized water, the reduction of spirit dilution.
'addition of demineralized water in the alcohol is done to bring the higher
strength to lower strength. in the case of indian made foreign liquor by
adding demineralized water's strength of 90%, v/v to 97 v/v is brought down to 42%.
and the desired strength as per the norms.
' then it is bottled. i need not go into that.
but the basic idea is to. i'm sorry.
now my lord, so far as. page 7.
but before that, the term 'potability', which is
now being used with regard to entry 8.
potability is a relative concept.
potability can mean something had as it is, like intoxicating drink.
we have a peg of whiskey or a vodka or something like that.
that's intoxicating drink and potable. that's one aspect of potability.
the other aspect of potability is that you add something
to it and you diffuse it and then make it drinkable.
how much you want to reduce and diffuse the strength
of the liquor is, that is as per your choice.
but it is something which is fit for human consumption?
potable liquor? potable liquor can mean both.
this is what i'm saying, that it is fit for consumption as it
is, or maybe after putting in something into it and then making it consumable.
that is my. as opposed to industrial alcohol.
but industrial alcohol can be used for industrial purpose also, like producing chemicals.
industrial alcohol is not potable. as it is, it is not.
but then rectified spirit of 95% or 94%, by just adding water,
you are reducing the strength of the rectified spirit and having it.
unless, of course, it is denatured.
denatured means when you are adding an item into
it, which perhaps makes it nauseous and of course, poisonous.
really, the word 'intoxicating' does not really mean
that it has to be fit for human consumption.
absolutely. it's an alcohol in which. it's a liquid in which alcohol is being added.
you're relying on the legislative history which was referred to in
balsara's case 1 and second, that the constitution when it wanted
to use related to alcohol fit for human consumption, it did
so in entry 84 of list i and entry 51 of list ii.
entry 8 is designedly only intoxicating liquors and therefore, intoxicating
cannot be conflated with fit for human consumption, according to you.
and i will be repeating myself.
after all, lordships, have always held in so many decisions
that why use two different phrases for denoting the same thing?
once different phrases are used, then obvious intention is that it denotes something different.
and so widely different.
now, the other thing which i wanted to emphasize on is, please notice this.
government of india act comes in 1935 and for
the first time it uses the word intoxicating liquor .
entry 31 it has entry 40 which again, is parallel to entry 51, list ii.
this is okay. so, the government of india act of 1935.
for the first time in india use the phrase, not in
the constitutional statute, the word, intoxicating liquor comes in entry 31.
and it's in the same form as entry
8, like the framers have borrowed it from there.
and at the same time, they use same phraseology as in entry 51, list
ii, alcoholic liquor for human consumption , in entry 40, which is excise duty.
same as 51, list ii. can you say that again?
my lord, in entry 40, the same phraseology as in entry
51, list ii, alcoholic liquor for human consumption , has been used.
when i had placed the local acts as forming the backdrop, surely the
makers of the government of india act were aware of those local acts.
their own liquor licensing act, which used the term intoxicating liquor .
their spirit act of 1870 which used both denatured as well as.
it was used for licensing in the intoxicating liquor act of 1910.
i have indicated that in page 7 this aspect.
page 7 to 8.
but an interesting factor, which i wanted to bring
to your lordship's notice in this regard is this.
when government of india act entry 31 uses the same phraseology as
the local acts, intoxicating liquor, then obviously, it had in mind that
intoxicating liquor , which was defined in most of the local acts.
that has been borrowed in the constitution of india, obviously, it follows the same thing.
now, in entry 8, the word intoxicating liquor , is there they have followed that.
in entry 51 or entry 40, list ii of the government of india act and
entry 51, list ii of the constitution, they have followed the same pattern as in.
entry 84, list i. entry 84.
first it is entry 51, list ii in the state list and then the
extruded part goes to entry 54, list i. entry 84, list i, as in.
i'm sorry, entry 84.
but then you see entry 8 list ii, is not a taxing entry.
but entry 51, list ii is a taxing entry.
quite right. so, we are not in the.
issue is not tax here. issue is the regulatory power, licensing powers.
so, what i am saying is, again, my lord, it corroborates
my viewpoint that taxing entry cannot be used to curtail the.
no, we are entitled to levy a tax.
no, no i'm not. you say that i'm entitled to regulate under entry 8.
and as incidental to the regulation, i can
impose a fees under entry 66 of list ii.
i am not even for a moment claiming that we have
a power to impose tax on denatured spirit or perhaps industrial alcohol.
no, we don't have. entry 84 is clear.
yes.
and there is no taxing entry other than entry
51, list ii in the state list, so we can't.
it hardly matters, it doesn't make much of a difference because
liquor is nothing but a good denatured spirit would be a good.
it can be taxes, sales tax.
likewise it is a good it can be
taxed under entry 52, that is entry tax earlier.
so, it's not that we can't tax denatured spirit or something.
it can be taxed in other forms, that
is sales tax, entry tax and other local taxes.
that can be done.
but of course, state by itself cannot tax it as an excise duty.
that power is not a way.
to say there is no power to tax
industrial alcohol is not correct, with due respect.
it is correct to say that we do not have the
power to impose excise duty on industrial alcohol, that is correct.
in fact, after synthetics, synthetics clearly held in paragraph 86 my lord that state
will not have power to impose sales or purchase tax once idr is there.
that had to be clarified by synthetics third case.
yes. my lord, that doesn't deal with sale and purchase tax.
therefore, it couldn't be held to be law on that.
laying down law on that.
so, interesting part of what i'm saying is if the government of india
act when it followed excisable article by specifying alcoholic liquor for human consumption
and incorporated that in entry 40, and it continued to follow intoxicating liquor
and put it in entry 31, then obviously, they were seeing the difference.
and therefore, for separate things, they were incorporating it in a separate phraseology.
we can't mix up entry 51, list ii and say it kind
of restricts entry 8 because that's a taxing entry, this is a
regulatory entry, and both lordships, have held in so many cases, separate.
so, taxing entry cannot colour the regulatory entry just as
regulatory entry cannot lead to enforcement of imposing of tax.
so, it would be quite unimaginable to think that the government of india, framers
of government of india act and the constitution partly followed the local laws and
they did not follow the local laws in other respect, that doesn't make sense.
then please complete the submission. . yes.
my lord, there is also a word called, 'alcoholic liquor' in entry 51, list ii.
your lordships, have seen. right. alcoholic liquor obviously is very wide.
therefore, they divide it by saying, for consumption.
consumption.
and if we read the definitions in the local acts, it
contains all liquids consisting of alcohol which would be alcoholic liquor.
so therefore, intoxicating liquor.
liquor means intoxicating liquor and contains all liquids consisting of alcohol, obviously means alcoholic liquor.
now, for instance, entry 54, after the 101st
amendment says taxes on alcoholic liquor for human consumption.
yes. so, state doesn't have the power to tax the industrial alcohol.
that is, it can only tax, impose tax
in respect of alcoholic liquor for human consumption.
but that does not, as i said, mean
that state cannot impose any tax on industrial alcohol.
it can sales tax. it can entry tax.
i mean, after all, industrial alcohol is nothing but goods.
the entry tax says goods brought in for sale and consumption, for use.
so it's not correct to say that, the entire field of taxation goes.
let's look at your submissions so that we then conclude that part.
page 7, i was placing, and i would
pray, kindly permit me to place the entire page.
and this, this one page only.
'the legislative practice leads us to british position, therefore to laws prevailing therein, license cons.'.
page number? the written submission, i have placed in page 7.
i'm sorry, there seems to be some confusion.
we got it. we got pdf page 7, bottom.
'the legislative practice leads us to british position and therefore, to laws prevailing therein.'
license consolidation act 1919, as i already told your lordships, includes the word 'intoxicating liquor'.
b) spirits act, 1980, which includes the denatured spirit.
spirit act defined spirit very widely to cover both potable and non-potable liquor.
section 3 to 5 and 16. it deals with manufacture, distillation, detailing, etc. of spirits.
while licensing act of 1910 deals with licensing of distribution.
word 'intoxicating liquor' is defined there to include
spirit of all kinds, including fermented and distilled.
british position is clear that intoxicating liquor includes all kinds of spirits.
the later 1910 act used this term compendiously to include all spirits, all
kinds of spirits, while spirit under 1880 act included liquor of all kinds.
thus, in england, both the terms were understood and used interchangeably.
that's what, my lord, the lordship would notice, balsara says.
it notices these two acts.
then the government of india act 1915, section 45, 79 to 81, 'the devolution
rules made under section 45 (a) and section 129 of government of india act
1915, distinguished the functions in jurisdictions of local governments and that of the governor
general or the indian legislature. the subjects have been classified as central or provincial
subjects. part 2 of the schedule i of the rules mentions item 16 as
excise and alcoholic liquor. it is around this time and thereabout, various state in
actants were framed pertaining to the alcoholic liquors.' what is important to notice is,
right from the earliest position, the local laws, the government of india act and
so on and so forth, the state had
the complete control and jurisdiction of intoxicating liquor.
earlier under the government of india act 1915, even the excise duty in
respect of entire intoxicating liquor was with the state, which was separated for
the first time in government of india act 1935, where industrial alcohol was
put in the can of union and in the can of the state.
that was the position and it was in the light of this position, leaving the.
the extracts of local laws. kindly come to para 12.
page 12. page? page 12. 12. page 12 of my written submissions.
volume 1(a).
'in all the state laws, where liquor and spirit are defined as including all
liquids containing alcohol. in some acts, word intoxicant , is used to define liquor
as comprising of all liquids containing alcohol. additionally, in some local act, liquor means
intoxicating liquor and includes all liquids containing alcohol. it is also noticeable that all
the local acts were alive and aware and aware of industrial alcohol and denatured
spirit. being integral part of spirit or liquor. reading all the above definitions, it
becomes apparent that excise, liquor and spirits have always been part of state jurisdictions,
including industrial alcohol. centre did not have any jurisdiction in this regard. the legislatures
were always aware of the industrial use of the alcohol and the local legislatures
were dealing with. liquor and spirit, traditionally, included all liquids consisting alcohol. industrial alcohol
is a liquid containing alcohol. there cannot be any alcohol or liquor which does
not cause intoxication. therefore, any liquid containing alcohol would be capable of causing intoxication.
it was in this sense word intoxicating liquor were defined. intoxicating liquor only follows
the past legislative history, for convenience, as part of the settled vocabulary position,
which it had come to denote.' then, your lordships, will omit this one.
then on page 14, my lord, i'll just rushed through it.
page 14, the latter half.
'the importance of the legislative practice and past history can never be minimized. this
constitutes an important aspect of context as indicated above for determining the scope of
legislative power field, one has to have regard to what legislative practice it ordinarily
embraces.' and these are the four questions, my
lord, four cases and then kindly add this case.
(1959) 1 scr 379, which i had referred to.
gannon dunkerley's case, which says that it is preferable to have legal sense rather than.
therefore, there would be a dichotomy, if your submission is correct.
namely, that the regulatory power over industrial alcohol would vest to the states.
but insofar as the taxing power is concerned,
the taxing power over industry goes to the centre.
but again, my lord, if i may remind lordships, the difference is
when we talk of taxing power, excise duty is not the only tax.
it's a tax on manufacture only.
but then rest of the tax state can impose,
like sales tax, entry tax and other local taxes.
yes. so, these are the cases where i had, my lord.
but then the important aspect here again is, my lord, let us fall
back on the question state and the union claims or the synthetics says
entry 52, is the source of power to regulate industrial alcohol, exclusive power.
then, as i pointed out, my lord, then that source leads us to entry 24.
now, if industry word includes industrial alcohol and intoxicating liquor means something else then
with due respect, does not taking the past into consideration, it doesn't make sense.
if the power had to be given to the state originally, if
the power had to vest in the state under entry 24, then
i possibly can't imagine why the framers would have not put it
in entry 8 rather than entry 24, which is a general vague entry.
to be searched and traced by your lordships
through legal arguments and dictionaries and things like that.
i mean, framers had not enumerated the lists
in a very carefully planned and perhaps elaborate manner.
why would they commit this kind of a confusion?
so therefore, to trace intoxicating i mean, to trace
industrial alcohol to entry 52 would be absolutely illogical.
that apart, my lord, may again. i'll come to what fell from lord justice chandrachud.
why not entry 97?
entry 97 is a residuary entry, which is supposed to be used in the.
there is no other state list entry or so.?
first thing we have to see is whether there
is a state entry or any entry in the concurrent.
entry or a concurrent list entry.
so, if in list ii and iii, if there is any entry
which can logically trace this within itself, then entry 97 cannot be used.
but then there's even other difficulty your lordships, would notice.
if the union traces it to entry 52, then obviously for that reason
also, entry 97 cannot be used, because then it falls in entry 24.
an intoxicating liquor and industrial alcohol would be in entry
24, basically and it can be drawn over to entry 52.
so, this again my lord, reduces our difficulty for placing it in entry 97.
it can't go to entry 97 because it has been traced to 52.
52 means 24, which means state list.
see, entry 24 is subject to list, entry 52 of list
i. suppose it is declared industry under entry 52, list i,
it can be any industry which is declared by the parliament?
no, that's a difficulty. it can only be that industry which is in entry 24.
so, entry 24 cannot include an industry which falls in entry 25.
that is also an industry and i'll cite
two, three cases on that that will clarify it.
the first decision which comes to mind is calcutta gas 1962.
now, what is the meaning to be given to entry 52, list i?
yes. that cannot be curtailed.
on the principle of what is called a parliamentary
supremacy, having regard to article 246 of the constitution.
i will answer that. my lord, first and foremost, we'll have to demarcate the fields.
now, when we go to demarcating the fields, we look at entry
52, list i. now entry 52, list i uses the word 'industry'.
there can be a declaration by parliament with regard to an industry.
now, the obvious question, which i would like to answer
is supposing there is no declaration of parliament, and entry
52 is not utilized, then where does this word 'industry' go?
it goes to entry 24.
so, there is an inherent link between entry 24 and 52,
and 52 only borrows from entry 24 and not anything else.
so, when i'm placing it in entry 8, intoxicating liquor, then the union cannot
take it over because that's a plenary jurisdiction of the state independent of entry 24.
there are two. really speaking your submissions boil down to two limbs.
first limb, that industrial alcohol falls within the ambit of entry 8 of list ii.
if it falls within the ambit of entry 8 of
list ii, it's a specific entry dealing with intoxicated liquors,
therefore, it does not fall in entry 24 of list ii.
since it does not fall in entry 24 of list ii and it is only
entry 24 of list ii which is subject to entry 51, industrial alcohol is not
subject to the overriding power of parliament under entry 52 of list i. that's one.
entry 8 is not subject, right. that's one.
second, you say even assuming that industrial alcohol does not fall within
the ambit of entry 8 of list ii then, in that event
and assuming, arguing though that it, falls under entry 52 of list
i, section 18-g contemplates that there has to be a notified order,
and in the absence of notified order, the
subject is not within the fold of parliament.
it falls within entry 33 of list iii.
and for this.
lordship is aware of tika ramji is the famous case where it says that.
tika ramji and then from there starting.
and declaration by parliament and the entry 52 of list i
notwithstanding, certain aspects are taken over, certain subjects which would otherwise
fall under entry 52 have been placed in entry 33 of list iii.
and therefore, the state power to regulate under entry 33
of list iii will include the power to levy a fee.
otherwise the consequence would be my lord, that all these entries 8, 25, they
all will be rendered new entry and empty by drawing power from idr act.
now, here would be, we'll be conferring parliament the jurisdiction to take away the
preliminary powers of the state legislature, which are not subject to, which are independent powers.
so, we can't adopt this.
even assuming that a declaration is issued by parliament under entry 52 of list
i, notwithstanding that, it's evident from entry 33, that yet trade and commerce, production,
supply, distribution comes within entry 33, because entry 33, clause a covers only those
industries which are declared under entry 52 of list i. and the other thing
is if your lordship would see, the calcutta gas is a constitution bench judgment.
the first case, where they considered this issue and they struck down
idr on the ground that you can't take over gas and gas works.
okay, we will come back after lunch.
now, mr. dwivedi, i think now, we can wrap up in a short while,
because we have made very substantial progress i think we have understood your point.
now you can show us whatever remains in half an hour or so.
my lords, we've made so much of an effort.
kindly give us some more time. oh yes, of course.
we will run through it. pour in our efforts for us.
yes, yes, of course. we'll look at the case law.
we'll run through now your written submissions and
see what case law needs to be looked at.
we have seen the essence of your submissions.
i'm grateful. appreciating your lordship's concern for early finish, my lord, i certainly.
i'm sorry. my lord, just one mentionable item, the chillness of the.
i'm sorry for that.
appreciating lordship's concern for early and fast finish,
i have revised my argument in a different way.
so, all that i would suggest now is just a recapitulation.
industrial alcohol must be understood in the context of the legal sense.
that is, the what it means is that it is part of intoxicating liquor.
if it is part of intoxicating liquor in entry 8, then
it cannot be there in entry 24, because the union's stand
is only that it is there entry 24 drawn to entry 52.
so, all that we have to answer here
is that it can't be in entry 24.
intoxicating liquor in entry 8 is not subject to unlike entry 24.
coming to this issue of paramountcy, my lord, we must take note of
this fact, paramountcy is a question which is resorted to only as an
ultimate resort when the conflict is there it cannot be resolved in any way.
otherwise, the rule of paramountcy is not applied.
what is applied is the issue of pith and substance, which your
lordships have devised, stating that the subjects will include the ancillary as
well as the incidental factors which can be legislated upon by the relevant legislature.
but this what your lordships have held is that incidental encroachment
on the state list can never imply reduction in state's jurisdiction.
it can at best save the law, which is in dispute but
it cannot tantamount to restricting the scope of the legislative entry, which
is within the state jurisdiction or state's legislative power, which is independent.
states are, in the federal polity, they are
equally plenary, they are equally sovereign, sharing the sovereignty.
so, we can't perhaps cut short state's power through parliamentary
declarations that would be most damaging for the federal structure.
because every time parliament legislates on its own subject and, incidentally, encroaches upon
the state list your lordships may hold it as valid applying the doctrine
of pith and substance, which means in substance they acted within its own list.
but if by that principle we are going to take away the power
of the state in respect of one entry which is independent, then imagine
what will happen, my lord, most of the cases, parliament will legislate on
incidental and ancillary issues and it will continue to prevail over the state's jurisdiction.
where will the. ultimately, where will it go?
how far will it go?
so, that argument could be entirely destructive of the federal structure and should never
be adopted, that's what your lordships have always done, and i'll show the decisions.
but there also, your lordships have sounded a caveat that where the
dominant legislature, that is, the legislature in whose list the subject is;
when the dominant legislature legislates, and even if it conflicts with the
incidental encroachment by the union, then the law made by the dominant legislature will prevail.
yes. that is what justice ruma pal said in itc and that has been followed.
i'll give your lordship the reference of that judgment
in (2018), 4 scc 743 paragraph 39 to 43.
page? i'll give the reference page number.
your lordships have time and again decried this fact that we
must not adopt an attitude which whittles down the state's power.
that's the word used right from perhaps 1993, nine judges constitution bench.
that has been accepted right throughout up till now.
that word whittling down the state's power is 'anti-federal' has been accepted.
and this would be a classic case of whittling down
the state's power under entry 52, which is parliament's declaration.
that means parliament, by law, can take away the power of the
state to regulate some industry which is within its own exclusive sphere.
my lord, that decision is volume v(c), pdf page 1.
let's see that, jayant verma. paragraph 39 to 43.
paragraph 39, which is pdf page 38.
pdf page 39. it's my immaturity in this field perhaps exposes itself.
doesn't matter. few more hearings like this and you'll be absolutely on track.
we must appreciate that you're making the effort that's really to be appreciated, honestly.
i'm grateful, my lord, but my problem is which is kind of a
lurking suspicion, what happens post november would we continue like this or not?
that's the issue.
once it becomes a part of your life, it becomes a part of your life.
imagine when we did 370, with the number of volumes and
the five judges, it would have taken thrice as much of
time to resolve the article 370 case, if we didn't have our computers.
five judges, here nine judges, nine court masters having to hand over individual volumes,
multiple volumes, every time something is cited, one really shudders about how this was done.
i mean, maybe earlier time so far as the employment
situation in the country is concerned, this would be anti-employment.
no, the court masters are all gainfully employed.
they're doing something else. anyway, coming back to this, my lord, paragraph 39.
yes shri bhushan then relied upon a concurring judgment of ranganathan, j.
in federation of hotels and restaurants association of india vs union of india.
in paragraph 74, the learned judge, while upholding the hotel receipts
tax act, 1980 held that, in pith and substance, it was
referable to entry 82, list i, being, in substance, a tax on income.
in particular, shri bhushan relied upon the statement of the law that since parliament
had exclusive power, under article 246(1) and (3) of the constitution, to make laws
with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list i, if an act
of parliament is squarely covered by an entry in the union list, no restriction
can be read into the power of parliament to make laws in regard thereto.
this was made in the context of a taxation entry, which
as the aforesaid paragraph 74 itself states, refers to the constitutional
scheme which neatly divides the subject matters of tax between the
union and the states, so that there can be said to be no overlapping.
there is no discussion in this paragraph of parliamentary
paramountcy in the context of incidental trenching and unoccupied field.
this judgment, therefore, does not take the matter very much further.
insofar as article 246 is concerned, we have already seen how the
said article refers to federal supremacy insofar as the whittling down of
a state list entry is concerned, when compared with a union list entry.
once the spheres of both the entries have been delineated, the doctrine of pith
and substance comes in to test whether a particular legislation is referable, as a
whole, to an entry in list i or to the competing entry in list ii.
once it is found that the legislation as a whole is referable to an
entry in list i, but it incidentally encroaches upon an entry in list ii,
there is no reason for the doctrine of
unoccupied field not to apply to federal legislation.
the expression with respect to appears in all the sub-articles of article 246, which
expression, so far as clauses (1) to (3) are concerned, imports the twin doctrines
of incidental trenching and unoccupied field, which applies, therefore, to legislation made under clauses
(1) to (3) of article 246, thus making it clear that incidental encroachment by
parliament cannot be tolerated when the exclusive field
allotted to the state legislature is not occupied.
the paramountcy principle contained in article 246, as we have seen, is only taken as
a last resort after harmonious construction fails, and, that too, qua entries in competing lists.
once legislation is referable to one list or the other, the doctrine of
incidental trenching and unoccupied field would apply equally to both parliamentary and state legislations.
in the very first judgment of the federal court, cp & berar sales
of motor spirit & lubricants taxation act, 1938 in re air at page
31, jayakar, j. set out principles that were evolved on a reading of
the british north america act by the privy council, which would prove to
be a useful guide to the construction of
section 100 of the government of india act, 1935.
your lordship may leave that for a moment, these are principles which your
lordships may look into it but last clause which have been perhaps identified for.
even where there has been an endeavour to give pre-eminence to the central legislature
in cases of a conflict of powers, it is obvious that, in some cases
where this apparent conflict exists, the legislature could not have intended that powers exclusively
assigned to the provincial legislature should be absorbed in those given to the central legislature.
kindly keep that in mind.
then, my lord, they refer to paragraph 42, the federal structure under the constitutional
scheme can also work to nullify an incidental encroachment made by the parliamentary legislation
on a subject of a state legislation where the dominant legislation is the state legislation.
an attempt to keep the aforesaid constitutional balance intact and give a limited
operation to the doctrine of federal supremacy can be discerned in the concurring
judgment of ruma pal, j. in itc ltd. v. agricultural produce market committee.
this is a constitution bench, my lord, wherein, after quoting the observations of this
court in s.r. bommai, the learned judge had gone to observe as follows, the
fact that under the scheme of our constitution, greater power is conferred upon the
centre vis--vis the states does not mean that states are mere appendages of the centre.
my lord, may i pause here my lord, i recall what your lordship had observed
in the delhi matter, my lord, states are not satellites and appendages of the centre.
they have their own unique sphere, defined by the constitution.
within the sphere allotted to them, states are supreme.
the centre cannot tamper with their powers.
more particularly, the courts should not adopt an approach, an
interpretation, which has the effect of or tends to have
the effect of whittling down the powers reserved to the states.
now, the next paragraph is equally important, my lord.
yes.
although parliament cannot legislate on any of the entries in the state list, it
may do so incidentally while essentially legislating within the entries under the union list.
conversely, the state legislatures may encroach on the union list, when such an
encroachment is merely ancillary to an exercise of power intrinsically under the state list.
the fact of encroachment does not affect the vires
of the law even as regards the area of encroachment.
this principle commonly known as the doctrine of pith and
substance, does not amount to an extension of the legislative fields.
therefore, such incidental encroachment in either event does not deprive
the state legislature in the first case or parliament in
the second, of their exclusive powers under the entry so encroached upon.
in the event the incidental encroachment conflicts with legislation actually
enacted by the dominant power, the dominant legislation will prevail.
otherwise, the entire concept would be anti-federal.
yes. what else?
now, what i was submitting here is and i'll run through it very fast.
i had already placed large portions of my written submission, but so far as it
is based on the legal history in the legal sense lordships can look into it.
my lord, i would not read the entire
thing because it would be just repetition of my.
page 16 to 22 and i have referred
those principles which i have evolved with case laws.
and this case law, which is specified point wise buttress is what i'm arguing.
but then eventually, what i would submit with respect is the last
of these, page 22, the last paragraph my lord, 'therefore, any declaration.
my lords have got it? yes. therefore, any declaration under entry 52,
list i, only draws jurisdiction from entry 24, list ii, and cannot
affect state legislature's power under any entry other than entry 24, list ii.
this is settled position by various constitution benches of this court, entry
24 is a general entry while special entry are excluded from it.
this is also settled by the above judgments, particularly the following: 62
is a very clear-cut case in this regard because it pertains to,
as i had shown on entry 25, list ii, gas and gas works .
idr took over that. he said, you can't do that and they struck down.
likewise, my lord (1980),4 scc 136.
this is a case ishwari khetan where issue was
acquisition of a company read into entry 43, list iii.
they said, entry 52 cannot take over the power from entry 42, list iii.
then (1981), 4 scc 391, this is southern pharma, where again medicinal and
toilet preparations were held to be within intoxicating liquor as defined in balsara.
medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol, they were held to be within intoxicating liquor.
then my lord, (1996), 3 scc 709 is extremely critical.
it considers this argument in detail and then holds
that entry 8 cannot be taken over under entry 52.
now, of course, that case was a potable liquor.
but then what applies to potable liquor will equally apply
to a non-potable liquor if intoxicating liquor includes industrial alcohol.
so, this is direct authority which will help our cause.
and last of all, without wasting your lordship's time, i would
pray kindly allow me to place this judgment, (2002), 9 ssc 2.
can we also see 96 for a moment.
i mean, i think since you said it's very.
would your lordships like to see? just for two minutes.
let's have a look at it.
volume v, pdf page 2036 and paras are 25 to 38.
mr. dwivedi, why are you going to your
bound volume when it comes to the cases.
you are going that far on your readings.
there's a slight kink in the mind that we underline it while reading.
so, when something comes without underlining, i feel absolutely lost.
we underline all the time over here when you
are reading, because when you are dictating the judgment.
i understand what your lordship is saying.
you'll be able to underline as well.
i'm sure your junior will tell you that little trick.
no, i have, my lord, i have all.
but even without the stylus, you can underline.
2036 volume v is it? that is mcdowell.
mcdowell. this is the case in relation to potable alcohol.
para? 25 to 38. para 25, pdf page is 2054.
25 to 38. this would also greatly answer justice nagarathna's problem that.
this will answer. entries aforementioned disclose the following features.
they have referred to those entries, entry 33, 52.
your lordships will see in the earlier paragraph.
entry 8 paragraph 23. we may now notice the relevant entries in our constitution.
entry 6, 8, 24, 51 in list ii
in the seventh schedule to the constitution read thus.
your lordships have already seen, so i will not waste much of time on that.
entry 33 in list iii was substituted by constitution third amendment act, 1954.
the background to this entry is explained by this court in tika ramji vs
state of u.p. entry 33 of list iii reads trade and commerce in and
production, supply and distribution of (a) products of any industry where the control of
such industry by the union is declared by parliament by law to be expedient
in the public interest and imported goods of the same kind as such products;
(b) food stuff, including edible oil; (c) cattle fodder;
(d) raw cotton, that we are not concerned with that.
but food stuff, your lordship may keep in
mind, because i'll refer to that later on.
the entries aforementioned disclose the following features.
the power to make a law with respect to industries lies with
the states, entry 24, list ii, but the said entry is made
expressly subject to the provisions of entry 7 and 52 in list
i. it means that if parliament declares by law that it is
expedient, in public interest to take over the control of a particular industry or industries.
such industry or industries get transplanted to list i. in other words,
the industries in respect to which parliament makes a declaration contemplated by
entry 52 in list i, the states are denuded of the power
to make any law with respect to them under entry 24 list ii.
parliament has indeed made the declaration contemplated in entry 52 in list i. in section
2 of the idr act, which reads the declaration as to the expediency of control
by the union, it is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest
that the union should take under its control the industries specified in the first schedule.
by an amendment affected in '56, first schedule was amended. the amendment act inter
alia introduced entry 26 in the scheme. it reads fermentation industry, alcohol and other
products of the fermentation industry. the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners
is based upon these provisions. the submission is that manufacture and production of intoxicating
liquor is an industrial activity falling within item 26 of the first schedule to
the idr act. the idr act provides for licensing of industries mentioned in the
first schedule to the act besides providing extensive control and regulation of such industries
and their products. the grant, the renewal and the refusal to grant or renew
the license is thus the exclusive province of the centre. the state has no
say in the matter. the state legislature is incompetent to prohibit manufacture of intoxicating
liquors. but this argument, in our opinion, ignores the existence and the ambit of
entry 8, list ii. entry 8 expressly speaks of production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase
and sale of intoxicating liquors. it means that the power to make a law
with respect to the said matters rests with the state legislature. what is significant
is that the entry speaks expressly of production and manufacture of intoxicating liquors as
well. this would mean that the industries producing and manufacturing intoxicating liquors fall within
the purview of entry 8. may i pause here? your lordships must keep this
in mind, that this judgment is under the shadows of synthetics too.
it said that you don't have power in respect of industrial alcohol.
you can only regulate potable alcohol.
so it is under the shadow of that judgment that they are referring to.
applying the well-known rule of interpretation applicable to such situations (special excludes the
general), we must hold that the industries engaged in production and manufacture of
intoxicating liquors do not fall within entry 24, but do fall within entry 8.
this was the position at the commencement of the
constitution, and this is the position today as well.
once this is so, the making of a declaration by parliament as
contemplated by entry 52 of list i does not have the effect
of transferring or transplanting as it may be called, of the industries
engaged in production and manufacture of intoxicating liquors from the state list to union list.
as a matter of fact, parliament cannot take over the control of
industries engaged in the production and manufacture of intoxicating liquors by making
a declaration under entry 52 of list i. since the state entry
governs only entry 24 list ii, but not entry 8 list ii.
faced with the above position learned counsel for the petitioners
resorted to more than one argument to get over it.
firstly, it was submitted that the entries 24 and 8 should be read
harmoniously and that such harmonious reading should mean that the industries engaged in
production and manufacture of intoxicating liquors would fall within entry 24 because entry
24 deals with industries as such, while entry 8, according to such reading,
would be confined to matters other than production and manufacture of intoxicating liquors.
it is not possible to agree with the submission
which runs counter to the express language of entry 8.
it requires us to delete the words 'production and manufacture from entry 8 which
is not open to us. we cannot re write the entry. another limb of
this argument was that only those industries manufacturing intoxicating liquors which are not within
the purview of the idr. act will fall under entry 8. now kindly see
(d). reading the definition of industrial undertaking in clause (d) and the definition of
factory in clause (c) of section 3 of the idr. acts it is submitted
that two types of industries are not covered by the idr act viz. those
where manufacturing process is carried on (i) with the aid of power but with
less than 50 workers and (ii) without the aid of power but with less
than 100 workers. the submission is that these industries which are not within the
purview of the idr. act would remain within the purview of entry 8 while
the other industries would be under the control of the union. this argument is
equally unacceptable. this argument is premised upon the assumption that entry 52 in list
i over-rides entry 8 in list ii as well, which assumption, as we shall
presently point outs is without a basis and unacceptable, moreover, industries which are exempted
from the idr. act are exempted because of the very provisions of the idr
act- and not by virtue of entry 8 in list-ii. the ambit and scope
of a constitutional entry cannot be determined with reference to a parliamentary enactment. the
definition of factory in clause (c) of section 3 of the idr act may
be changed tomorrow. the meaning and scope of entry 8 in list ii does
not and cannot vary with the change in the provisions of the idr act.
this submission too is, therefore, unacceptable. it was then contended that entry 52 in
list i governs not only entry 24 in list ii but all other entries
in list ii including entry 8 insofar as it deals with industries. we cannot
accept this submission either. a perusal of list ii would show that whenever a
particular entry was intended to be made subject to an entry in list i
or list iii, it has been so stated specifically. not one but several entries
in list ii are made subject to one or the other entry in list
i or list iii. see entries 2, 3, 17, 22, 23, 26, 27 and
33. certain other entries use a different phraseology to demarcate the spheres of the
union and the states. for example, entry 32, incorporation, regulation and winding up of
corporations other than those. likewise, my lord, entry 51, list ii. all this shows
that whenever a particular entry in list ii is sought to be made subject
to another entry in list i or list ii or where a demarcation is
sought to be made between the union and the states within a particular head
of legislation, the founding fathers have taken care to say so expressly. we cannot,
therefore, accept the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners that entry 52
in list i impinges upon, over- rides and governs entry 8 in list ii
as well. it does not. we must make it clear that entry 8 speaks
of only intoxicating liquors and does not, therefore, apply to or take in liquors
which do not fall within the expression intoxicating liquors . the power to make
a law with respect to production and manufacture of intoxicating liquors is that
of the states alone. the prohibition of production and manufacture of intoxicating liquors
too squarely falls within the four corners of entry 8 read with entry
6 of list ii.' this was the decision of the constitution bench in khoday distilleries.
article 47, then they refer to. then, your lordship, they referred to.
37 straight away. 37. yes, my lord.
that will cover calcutta gas company. my lord, i am grateful.
again we may in this connection.
and this is the first case where this principle was evolved.
correct.
we may in this connection refer to constitution based decision of
this court in calcutta gas vs state of west bengal, which
furnishes a complete answer to the petitioner's contention on this court.
the west bengal legislature passed an act, west bengal oriental
gas company act, 1960, with a view to take over
their management and control of the undertaking of the oriental gas company.
notifications were issued under the act taking over the company, which
was questioned by way of a writ petition in calcutta high court.
the writ petition was dismissed, whereupon the matter was brought to this court.
the main contention on behalf of the appellant was that the
west bengal legislature has no legislative competence to enact the said act.
it was submitted that by virtue of industries development regulation act 1951, which contains
a declaration in terms of entry 52 in list i and the schedule thereof
included fuel gas, coal gas, natural gas and the like under item 2, 3.
the power to make law with respect to those industries
engaged in the manufacturer of gas has been vested in
the union, and that state has been totally denuded of that power.
it was contended that entry 24 in list ii takes in
all industries in that entry 25, which reads gas and gas
works, should be confined to matters other than those covered by entry 24.
inasmuch as the impugned enactment was a law relating to gas industry, it
was submitted, the act made by the state legislature is incompetent and void.
reliance was also placed upon article 246 of the constitution.
all these contentions were negatived.
after referring to the provisions of the idr act and the impugned west bengal
act, the relevant entries in the seventh schedule to the constitution, including entries 7
and 52 in list i and entries 24 to 27 in list ii, and
the principles governing the interpretation of the entries in the seventh schedule, the court
indicated that the matter was susceptible of three possible constructions: (1) entry 24 of
list ii, which provides for industries, generally, covers the industrial aspect of gas and
gas works leaving entry 25 to provide for other aspects of gas and gas
works; (2) entry 24 provides generally for industries, and entry 25 carves out of
it the specific industry of gas and gas works, with the result that the
industry of gas and gas works, is excluded from entry 24; and (3) the
industry of gas and gas-works falls under both the entries,
that is, there is a real overlapping of the said entries.
the court opined that having regard to the well-settled principles relating to interpretation of these
entries, that interpretation which reconciles and harmonises the contending entries should be adopted and held.
and entry 24 in list ii in its widest amplitude
takes in all industries, including that of gas and gas works.
so too, entry 25 of the said list comprehends gas industry.
there is therefore an apparent conflict between the two entries, and they overlap each other.
in such a contingency, the doctrine of harmonious construction must be invoked.
if industry in entry 24 is interpreted to include
gas and gas works, entry 25 may become redundant.
and in the context of succeeding increase, namely entry 26 dealing with trade
and commerce and entry 27 dealing with production, supply and distribution of goods,
it will be deprived of all its content and reduce to useless lumber.
on the other hand, the alternative contention enables entries
24 and 25 to operate fully in their respective fields.
while entry 24 covers a wide field that is the field of
the entire industry in the state, entry 25 dealing with gas and
gas works can be confined to a specific entry that is the gas industry.
it is therefore clear, that the scheme of the harmonious
construction suggested on behalf of the state gives full and
effective scope of operation for both the entries in their respective fields.
while that suggested by the learned counsel for the appellant
deprives entry 25 of all its content and makes it redundant.
the former interpretation must therefore be accepted in preference to the latter.
in this view, gas and gas works are
within the exclusive field allotted to the state.
on this interpretation the argument of the learned attorney general that under 246
of the constitution, the legislative power of state is subject to that of
parliament ceases to have any force, for the gas industry is outside the
legislative field of parliament and is within the
exclusive field of the legislature of the state.
we, therefore, hold that the impugned act was within the
legislative competence of the bengal legislature and was, therefore, validly made.
the court proceeded to hold further. your lordships, it's a repetition, the rest, my lord.
the ratio of the above decision fully supports what we have said hereinbefore.
in fact, entry 8 is more specific than entry 25 in list ii.
while entry 25 merely speaks of gas and gas-works, entry 8 expressly speaks
of production and manufacture besides possession, transport, purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors.
the ratio of the calcutta gas case fully supports our conclusion that the industries
engaged in the production and manufacture of intoxicating liquors are outside the purview of
entry 24 and fall squarely within entry 8 in list ii, and that entry
52 in list i does not override or impinge upon entry 8 in list ii.
according to this decision, the expression industry in both entry 24 and entry 52
in list i must carry the same meaning, which means that if a particular
industry is not within the purview of entry 24 in list ii, it would
not equally be within the purview of entry
52, list i. the decision also supports our conclusion.
article 246 cannot be invoked to deprive the state legislature of
the powers inhering in them by virtue of entries in list ii.
once enactment in pith and substance is relatable to entry 8 in list
ii or for that matter any other entry in list ii, article 246
cannot be brought in to yet hold that state legislature is not competent.
now, what is important here again is that all these
decisions are based on what we call the word industry .
my lord, one word industry in entry 24 as the
judgment says has the same meaning as in entry 52.
but what is the scope of this word industry
and that is where tika ramji is the locus classicus.
yes.
which is (1956) scr 393 pdf page 80
and this tika ramji's case still holds the field.
mr. dwivedi we discussed calcutta gas company, right?
that is volume v. page pdf 2149.
just come to that judgment para 9, where tika ramji is elaborately discussed.
yes that will give a fair idea.
your lordships are right, my lord.
tika ramji was considered by calcutta gas and that is for the word industry.
para 9 at pdf 2158. i'm grateful about 15 lines.
. 2158 correct in the para 9.
in a descending order.
first question that occurs, if i may please, with your lordship's permission?
yes. the first question that occurs. give us the, which page you are reading?
2158 pdf page, volume 5 and we are at 2150.
pdf page 2158. that's the whole confusion.
the first question. if i may place?
yes.
the first question that occurs to one's mind is what is
the meaning of the expression industry in entry 24 of list ii?
is it different from the meaning of that expression in entry 52 list ii?
whatever maybe it's connotation, it must bear the same meaning in
both the entries for the two entries are so interconnected that
conflicting or different meanings given to them would snap the connection.
entry 24 is subject to the provisions of entry 7 and 52 list
i. entry 7 of list i provides for industries declared by parliament, by
law to be necessary for the purposes of defence or for the prosecution
of war and entry 52 for industries the control of which by the
union is declared by parliament, by law, to be expedient in the public interest.
therefore, ordinarily, industry is in the field of state legislation.
but if parliament by law makes a relevant declaration or declarations, the industry or
industries so declared would be taken off its field and passed on to parliament.
in the premises the expression industry in all
the entries must be given the same meaning.
now, what is the meaning of the word industry ?
in tika ramji state of up, the expression industry is defined to mean
'the process of manufacture or production' and does not include the raw materials
used in the industry or the distribution of the products of the industry.
it was contented that the word industry was a word of wide import
and should be construed as including not only the process of manufacture or
production, but also activities and antecedent thereto such as acquisition of raw materials
and subsequent thereto such as disposal of the finished products of that industry.
but that contention was not accepted.
it is not necessary in this case to attempt to define
the expression industry precisely or to state exhaustively all its ingredients.
assuming that the expression means only production or manufacture, would
it take in its sweep production or manufacture, of gas?
entry 24 in list ii in its widest amplitude
takes in all industries, including that of gas and gas-works.
so too, entry 25 of the said list comprehends gas industry.
there is therefore, an apparent conflict between the two entries and they overlap each other.
in such a contingency doctrine of harmonious construction must be invoked.
both the learned counsels accept the principle, while the learned attorney general seeks
to harmonise both the entries by giving the widest meaning to the word industry.
so as to include the industrial aspect of gas and
gas works and leaving the other aspects to be covered by.
my lord, the rest my lord is covered
under mcdowell, your lordships have already seen that.
but the critical part in my lord, tika ramji's consideration is not
entirely here and therefore, what i want to do is not to
cut short time instead of reading all those decisions, there are at
least 5-7 constitution benches in that sphere, so it will be wasting time.
there's one judgment of your lordships which deals with all of them, my
lord and synopsizes all those cases right from tika ramji onwards till itc judgement.
and this is still holding the field there's no dispute with regard to this.
were you referring to this?
i was reading the original tika ramji 'industry in the wide
sense of the term would be capable of comprising three different aspects'.
were you reading that part? i'm on tika ramji.
my, lord that was very well dealt with in tika ramji,
my lord all the matters, all the aspects of industry they noted.
you see paragraph 24 at volume v, page 96, volume v tika
ramji begins at page 80 yes, and if you see paragraph 24.
actually, that's a crucial part of tika ramji.
see there, the question was whether the process of acquiring
sugar cane, which was a raw material for the manufacture
of sugar, whether that will be covered within the ambit of industry.
that they said would fall as 'goods' under entry 26.
para 24 is important, actually, at page 96, pdf page 96.
yes. the passage begins as, it is clear, therefore.
have your lordships got it? yes.
it is clear, therefore, that all acts, all the acts and
the notifications issued thereunder by the centre, in regard to sugar
and sugar cane, were enacted in excise of the concurrent jurisdiction.
the exercise of such concurrent jurisdiction would not deprive the provincial
legislature of similar powers which they had under the provincial legislative
list, and there would therefore be no question of legislative competence.
incompetence. i'm sorry.
incompetence qua the provincial legislature in regard to
similar pieces of legislation enacted by the latter.
the provincial legislature as well as the central legislature would be competent to
enact such pieces of legislation and no question of legislative competence would arise.
it also follows as a necessary corollary that even though sugar industry was a
controlled industry, none of these acts enacted by the centre was in exercise of
its jurisdiction under entry 52, list i. now, actually what follows is very important.
industry in the wide sense. in the wide sense.
industry, in the wide sense of the term,
would be capable of comprising three different aspects.
1) raw materials which are an integral part of the industrial process.
2) the process of manufacture or production; and
3) the distribution of the products of the industry.
the raw material would be goods, which would
be comprised in entry 27 of list ii.
the process of manufacture or production would be comprised in entry 24 of
list ii, except where the industry was a controlled industry when it would
fall under entry 52, list i. and the products of the industry would
also be comprised in entry 27 of list ii as 'goods', except where
they were the products of the controlled industry
when they would fall under entry 33, list iii.
this being the position, it cannot be said that the legislation which
was enacted by the centre in regard to sugar, and sugar cane
would fall within entry 52 of list i. before sugar industry became
a controlled industry, both sugar and sugar cane fell within entry 27 of list ii.
but after declaration was made by parliament in 1951 by act 65 of '51,
sugar industry became a controlled industry and the product of that industry which is
sugar, was comprised in entry 33 of list iii, taking it out the entry
27 of list ii. even so, the centre as well as the state legislatures
had concurrent jurisdiction in regard to the same. in no event could the legislation
in regard to the sugar and sugar cane, be thus be included in the
entry 52 of list i. the pith and substance argument also cannot be imported
here for the simple reason that when both the centre as well as the
state legislatures were operating in the concurrent field, there was no question of any
trespass on the exclusive jurisdiction vested in the centre under entry 52 of list
i. the only question that survived being whether putting both the pieces of legislation
enacted and the state legislature together, there was any repugnancy in issue, and here
they found, my lord, there was no repugnancy because there was no central law.
the 'conflict has to be in fact', my lord, this is the judgment which
for the first time said there has to be a 'conflict in fact',
and therefore you've got to legislate under the idr act to control this.
but then the interesting part of it is my
lord, this which your lordships will bear in mind.
kindly come to entry 33.
there is one interesting factor which your lordships may take into consideration here again which.
difference in tika ramji was, tika ramji was
concerned with the control over the antecedent raw material.
over here we are not dealing with the control over the antecedent raw material.
this is the heart of the industry.
but the word 'industry' was considered and the scope of word industry was found.
no, but important part is, 'why'.
question was that was tika ramji is a
case where on the one hand there was.
actually but for entry 8 of list ii, industrial alcohol would fall within the
ambit of industry in entry 52 of list i. how would it fall, my lord?
this is a question i. but for entry 8.
it's an industry. i'll answer that, my lord.
then we would at the same time be saying that intoxicating liquor would be
only potable liquor and industry pertaining to portable liquor would exclusively go to entry 8.
no, that's not.
i'm saying that it is because of entry 8 that it doesn't go into
entry 24 and doesn't go into entry 52, but if entry 8 was not there.
then it could have been.
it would have been an industry then, within entry 52 of list 1.
yes, no doubt about it. important thing is tika ramji.
so, what is the ambit of the expression?
i'll answer that. fermentation and. your lordship has?
my lord kindly again go back to.
there are two answers to what your lordship's query is.
what would be the difference between intoxicating liquor and alcohol?
every intoxicating liquor, as per the local act
your lordship has seen meant all liquids containing alcohol.
so, every alcohol will have to be there.
because under the entry 26 of the schedule.
that is the changed entry my lord.
one is. it's a modified entry.
this has been modified in 2016 where, because of the bihar distillery
they carved out an exception against potable alcohol which was not there earlier.
when these cases were considered mcdowell, tika ramji the position was entirely different.
only fermentation in the industry was specified with alcohol, the word 'alcohol'.
what is the entry before 2016? the only thing within the brackets were omitted.
it was fermented one into the products.
alcohol and other products of . fermentation.
yes. so other than potable alcohol was added by the 2016.
that bracket portion was added. so, fermentation industries would take an intoxicating liquor?
normally, my lords, fermentation industry that was interpretation given to it.
but the whole question is, can you take it?
that's the question. can the parliament take it?
now to answer, the chief justice's query.
no one has challenged, there's no doubt about it.
no one has challenged, the inclusion of fermentation industry.
there's no doubt about it.
but in calcutta gas no one had challenged it, yet the court struck down
that on the ground that we are deciding and deciphering the scope of legislative entry.
so if the act of another two legislatures do
not fall within that entry, then they have to go.
the dominant legislature has to prevail likewise in itc, again, the same thing was done.
this objection was raised, that no one has challenged the idr act.
but the whole question would be, that if the parliament legislates.
if we accept your submission.
i mean, not that we are saying that
it's wrong we're just trying to explore it.
that would mean that any industry that is specified in list ii that
would include gas work that would include intoxicating liquor, that will fall outside
entry 52 of list i. 52 of list i. 54 is mines and minerals.
your lordships has done the mines and minerals matter with entry 54 .occurs in.
52. it would be outside that. no, but then why does parliament cover.
prior to 2016, parliament covers the entirety of alcohol.
but the whole issue is whether that is correct or not?
because your lordships are defining the scope of the entry and parliament
is legislating on an entry which is not there in their field.
so, how can. my lord legislation without power is a void legislation, still born.
but you are appearing for whom?
the state of u.p. u.p. my lord we are
the petitioners actually sitting on the wrong side, actually.
that is the problem.
but are you saying, therefore, that the legislation which is enacted by parliament is void?
yes. otherwise we can't get the jurisdiction, my lord.
kindly look at it this way.
state's jurisdiction has been denied by synthetics on these grounds, entry 52.
now, if we do not challenge that, synthetics cannot be overcome.
if synthetics overcome, then what are we, with due respects reconsidering?
we are considering whether synthetics when it relies upon entry 52
to shut down state's jurisdiction in respect of intoxicating liquor, which
includes industrial alcohol that is incorrect, and state's jurisdiction cannot be taken away.
synthetics took away because of entry 52 and idr.
my lord, i'll satisfy your lordships on this issue that
i need not challenge if the question arises during consideration.
what is the scope of the legislative entry and if there
is any conflict, your lordships will have to resolve the conflict.
and if, your lordships resolve the conflict in the manner i am advocating,
my lords, then the question would be clear that centre had legislated absolutely illegally.
otherwise, your lordships would see even though state has jurisdiction
under entry 8 yet because of parliamentary declaration or legislation,
we are denied the power to legislate on our own field.
my lord, whatever is troubling your lordship that no
one has challenged idr, my lord, was answered by itc.
legislated. exactly.
on an industry which falls within the scope of entry 8 of list ii.
exactly. because alcohol. my lord, that is, assuming it falls.
my lord, industrial alcohol, if it is part of
intoxicating, then what your lordship is saying is correct.
but if it has, then what will be the consequence.
and the aspect that is troubling your lordships here is that since no
one has challenged idr and it has been prevailing, then what can be done?
my lord that is answered by itc.
we need not challenge it.
when lordships determine the scope of the entries, then the power of the state
with respect to its own entry cannot be declined because parliament has declared something.
otherwise, tomorrow parliament will take over gas and gas works, then what happens?
see because article 246 (1), it begins with a non obstante clause.
notwithstanding anything contained in clauses 2 and 3.
clauses 2 is with regard to concurrent list.
clause 3 is with regard to state list.
notwithstanding anything contained in the concurrent list and the state list,
parliament has exclusive power to do it with regard to union list.
now, let me explain it this way.
your lordships saw in that case of, my lord, jayant verma, the word
'notwithstanding' is a concept which only emerges when there is an irreconcilable conflict.
first, the effort should be to reconcile the conflict if it appears
now, parliament may have legislative on 'a' entry or 'b' entry, but
the fact is what we have to see is whether that legislation
is within its field or not and likewise state legislation within its field or not.
now, when we find that there are two entries which
are overlapping, for instance, industry, gas and gas works, they
were overlapping, the court found in mcdowell as well as calcutta gas.
now, if they were overlapping, then your lordships
have to evolve some principles of harmonious construction.
my lord, the non-obstante clause.
the other harmonious way would be to say that, 'yes, the state
does have the power over intoxicating liquor but once there is a
declaration made by parliament under entry 52, then your power is denuded.'
which means entry 8 list ii, even though it is not being
made specifically subject to entry 52, it becomes subject to like entry 24.
so, what are we saying is that we are reading word 'subject
to' in entry 8 which perhaps it is not open to read.
then what is the meaning to be given
to the expression 'notwithstanding anything contained' in article 246(1)?
i'll answer that.
'notwithstanding' means in case the conflict is irreconcilable, harmoniously, then,
in that event, parliamentary entry would prevail over the state entry.
but the fact is, when your lordships can reconcile harmoniously,
as your lordships have done in the case of mcdowell
and calcutta gas, then perhaps non obstante clause would not operate.
that is the question. no, but in every case.
whether we can narrow the scope of the expression 'industry' in
entry 52, list i. entry 24, list i. entry 52, list
i. for that the answer was there in this mcdowells case.
entry 52 draws from entry 24.
now what we have to see, what is the position in
the state list with regard to word 'industry' in the state list.
now in the state list, 'industry' means what?
that has been determined in calcutta gas as well as mcdowell.
it means only manufacture, it would not include entry 26,
27 or any other entry that is not subject to it.
for instance, calcutta gas entry 25, that is also an industry, like entry 8.
now calcutta gas union took over the jurisdiction by specifying it as an idea.
under the idea in the schedule.
now, despite the fact they had specified in the idea the gas and gas works.
yet, the court said, when we look into the entries that are there,
what appears to be is that the word 'industry' in state list would
exclude those entries which are independent of and are not subject to entry 52.
for instance, gas and gas works is not subject to, but if parliament can
still take it over, then what is the point in specifying 25, list ii separately.
it could have been there in the word 'industry'.
so long it has not taken over by the parliamentary law, it will remain
with the state list, but once it comes under the idr act, what happens?
i think there's one thing which has been missed, my lord.
i would submit with due respect.
so long it is not taken over, but what can be taken
over is only what is there in industry, that is, entry 24.
it cannot take over something which is not there in entry 24.
now our submission is with the support of mcdowell and
the other cases, that entry 24 will not include entry 8.
that is what mcdowell says, and it will not
include entry 25 that is what calcutta gas says.
if word 'industry' does not include that, then you can't take it over.
parliament cannot take it over. power of parliament is not entirely absolutely wide and expansive.
parliament's power cannot run amok over the state list, except
so far as word 'industry' in entry 24 is concerned.
so, it is 24 only, which is subject to deprivation on a declaration.
no other entry. what else now remains?
i really wanted to read this judgement which is, itc (2002), 9 scc 232.
this is volume v, pdf page 1597.
this would clarify all the queries that have
fallen from your lordships and therefore i wanted to.
if i may indicate the paragraphs, para 10.
i'll give the paragraphs which are relevant for my purpose, para.
10, 26 to 32, 40, 86 and this deals
with the entire history with regard to the word 'industry'.
entry 52 as well as entry 24.
this is in volume 5, 1597? yes.
so instead of reading all these decisions, my lord this has
the judgments, all the judgments, constitution bench judgment in the synopsized form.
to give the gist of the dispute my lord, kindly come to pdf page 1617.
now, in this case, the minority judgment holds the, my lord, in favour of
the union that the incidental encroachment would take away the power of the state.
in the proposed judgment.
this is the minority judgment and justice sabharwal's judgment is the majority judgment.
in the proposed judgment, justice pattanaik has held that the word industry in entry.
just tell us the para once again.
para 10, pdf page 1617. we are now referring to, justice sabharwal's judgement, right?
justice sabharwal's judgement. chief justice sabharwal's in fact.
yes no, i'm sorry. he was not the chief justice at that time.
justice bharucha was the chief justice.
in the proposed judgment, justice pattanaik has held
that the word 'industry' in entry 52 of union.
and by the way this will answer the other question too completely.
this will answer the other question too.
therefore, i chose this decision that will save time.
in the proposed judgment, justice pattanaik has held the word 'industry' in entry
52 of the union list cannot be given restricted meaning so as to
exclude from its purview the subject of legislation coming within entry 27 or
entry 14 of list ii and thus, the parliamentary legislation, namely, the tobacco
board act, 1975 is constitutionally valid and consequently, the state legislations entitling the
market committee to levy fee for sale and purchase of raw tobacco within
the market area will not be operative so far as the produce of
tobacco is concerned and that the majority judgment in the itc case is correctly decided.
your lordship may omit the rest. kindly come to paragraph 26.
it is pdf page 1621.
before considering the aforenoted decisions, it would be appropriate to make
it clear that in these matters it has to be kept
in view that this court is not examining a case where
the field of legislation is in concurrent list to which article 246(2) applies.
this court is also not considering the case of an
incidental trenching of field by one or the other legislature.
the court is concerned with the question of legislative competence.
we are examining a case where what has been questioned is the legality of the
legislation in respect of a field in the state list to which article 246(3) applies.
the validity and applicability of the state legislations in respect of a
field of legislation of state list has come under a cloud on
account of a legislation passed by the parliament in respect of field
of legislation under entry 52 of the union list, namely, the tobacco board act, 1975.
it is on account of this legislation containing declaration as contemplated by
entry 52 of the union list that doubts have arisen about the
validity and applicability of state legislation about the sale of agricultural produce
of tobacco in market areas and levy thereupon of market fee which
aspect are on field of legislation on the
state list, entries 14, 27, 28 and 66.
entry 24 of the state list is subject to entries 7 and 52
of list i. we are not concerned in these matter with entry 7.
the question here is as to the effect of transfer of field of
legislation under entry 24 of the state list to the union list, entry
52, on other fields in the state list, namely, fields of legislation under
entries 14, 27, 28 and 66 and what is fact can be transferred.
that's the question we are concerned with in this case.
now they refer to baijnath kadio, your lordship may omit that.
28 also your lordships may omit that.
kindly come to 31. 30, my lord.
relying upon ishwari khetan's case mr. shanti bhushan contends that entry
52 has been equated with entry 54 of the union list.
both sides have relied upon the case of ishwari khetan .
let us examine that case.
in ishwari khetan's case the contention urged was that the parliament has made the
industrial (development and regulation) act, 1951 (for short, 'the idr act') in entry 52
list i declaring control of sugar industry and that industry goes out of entry
24 of list ii and, therefore, state legislature is denuded of legislative powers in
respect of sugar industry and impugned legislation was with
respect to acquisition of sugar undertaking and sugar industry.
the attorney general and contended that the power to
acquire property was derived from entry 42 of list iii.
ishwari khetan's case involved the determination or scope of entry
52 of list i and entry 24 of list ii only.
the scope of these entries with respect to entries 26 and 27 of
list ii and entry 33 of list iii did not fall for consideration.
paragraphs 7, 8 and 11 of ishwari khetan the constitution bench repeatedly
pointed out that a declaration in entry 52 of list i denudes
state legislature of the power to legislate under entry 24, list ii only.
kindly notice this, 'only'. it was noticed that the sugar was a declared industry.
the question posed was that is it, however, correct to say that
once a declaration is made as envisaged by entry 52 list i,
that industry as a whole is taken out of entry 24 of list ii?
the answer given by the constitutional bench was that it is not correct
to say that once a declaration is made in respect of an industry
that industry as a whole is taken out of entry 24 list ii.
it was said that the industry as a legislative head
is found itself placed in entry 24 of list ii.
the state legislature can be denied legislative power under entry 24 to the extent
parliament makes declaration under entry 52 and by such declaration, parliament acquired power to
legislate only in respect of those industries in respect of which declaration is made
and to that extent as manifested by legislation incorporating the declaration and not more.
your lordships may recall, my lord, that initially your lordships had posed
this question that entry 52 does not use the word 'to the extent'.
the bench further said that the legislative power of the state under entry 24,
list ii is eroded only to the extent the control is assumed by the
union pursuant to the declaration and the state legislature which is otherwise competent to
deal with industry under entry 24, list ii can deal with that industry in
exercise of other powers enabling it to legislate under different heads set out in
list ii and list iii and this power cannot be denied to the state.
the extent of parliamentary legislation was seen only to determine how much
is taken out from entry 24 list ii and not for the
purposes of laying down any principle that parliamentary legislation has to be
seen to determine the extent of control and the denudation of the
power of the state legislature to the extent
the control is laid down by the parliament.
further, it was held that despite the parliamentary legislation the state legislature can
deal with industry in exercise of other powers in different entries in list
ii and list iii and that power cannot be denied to the state.
in this case the court was examining whether the law of acquisition of
sugar undertaking was referable to entry 24, list ii or entry 42, list iii.
it was concluded that the acquisition of the
property was referable to entry 42 list iii.
the scope of the industry did not fall for examination in ishwari khetan's case .
there is no discussion on the interpretation of expression 'industry' and that
probably is the reason why tika ramji's case has not been referred to.
the reliance on baijnath kadio's case in ishwari khetan's case was to
show the denudation of states' power being limited to the extent of control.
while baijnath kadio's case dealt with entry 23, list
ii, ishwari khetan's case dealt with entry 24, list ii.
the subject matter of the other entries was not in issue in this decision.
the structure in entry 54 of list i was not equated with
that of entry 52 list i as contended by mr. shanti bhushan.
this decision does not adopt the mines and minerals cases for the purposes of considering
the scope of entry 52 of list i. in our view, the cases of mines
and minerals are not of much assistance while examining the scope of entry 52 of
list i. in state of a.p. vs mcdowell also it was held that the ambit
and scope of a constitutional entry cannot be determined with reference to a parliamentary enactment.
if it is otherwise, it would result in the parliament enacting and/or
amending an enactment thereby controlling the ambit and scope of the constitutional provision.
that cannot be the law.
the power to legislate with which we are concerned in contained in article 246.
the fields are demarcated in the various entries.
on reading both, it has to be decided whether the
concerned legislature is competent to legislate when its validity is questioned.
the ambit and scope of an entry cannot
be determined with reference to a parliamentary enactment.
tika ramji's case is required to be examined in detail, since
that has been the bone of serious elaborate submissions in that case.
the challenge by the sugarcane growers hailing from several villages of the state of u.p.
was to the validity of up sugarcane, (regulation of supply and purchase) act '53 and
notification issued thereunder. a short history of legislation enacted by the centre as well as
the province of u.p. in regard to sugar and sugarcane was noticed. your lordships may
omit that. kindly come to para 40, pdf page 1626. on 31-10-1951, parliament enacted the
industries development regulation act '51 to provide for the development and regulation of certain industries.
by section 2 of the act, it was declared that
it was expedient in the public interest that the union
should take in its control, the industries specified in first schedule.
the schedule included industries engaged in the manufacture or production of sugar.
the u.p. legislature enacted impugned act.
the object of it was as follows: with the promulgation
of industries development regulation act, with effect from so and
so, the regulation of sugar industry has been exclusively a central subject.
the state government are now only concerned with
the supply of sugarcane to the sugar factories.
the bill is being introduced in order to provide for rational distribution of sugarcane
to factories for its development on organized scientific lines to protect the interest of
the cane growers of the industry and to
put the new act permanently on the statute.
in exercise of the rulemaking power conferred by the impugned act, the
u.p. government made rules and also promulgated up sugarcane regulation supply purchase order.
all these related to the supplies and purchase of sugarcane in up.
challenging the vires of the state act, one of
the submissions made in tika ramji's case before the constitution.
we have seen tika ramji. why are we reading this?
actually, if you go to para 61, that's where
justice sabharwal has summed up what he wants to say.
just see para 61 at 1632. kindly give me one minute, my lord.
that will be your internal page 267 of the judgment.
sabharwal says this is. just see placitum c at page 1632.
placitum c, if you have the same copy.
1632 placitum c. the expression industries in entry 24 of list
ii or entry 52 of list i cannot be interpreted in
a manner that would make other entries of list ii of
the seventh schedule subject to union control which in fact they are not.
whether it was intended to be made subject to such control, whether
of list i or that of list iii, it was said so.
a perusal of list ii shows that whenever a particular
entry was intended to be made subject to an entry
in list i or iii which has been so stated specifically.
therefore, an interpretation which tends to have the effect of making a
particular entry subject to any other entry, though not so stated in
the entry, deserves to be avoided unless that be the only possible interpretation.
we do not think that certain interpretations on the entries in question, namely 52
of the union list and 24 of the state list deserves to be placed .
that is really the heart of what the learned judge said.
quite right. but one of the passages your lordships have dealt with this issue also.
this is not a dissent is it?
this is not a dissent. this is the majority judgement.
now they had dealt with this issue that central act has not challenged idr.
they have dealt with that. they have dealt with that as well.
the learned judge says if and when it is challenged.
no, it's come expressly. i will show.
paragraph 64 at page 1633. shadan, just give it to him.
para 64 at 1633.
the validity of certain other acts, such as cardamom act,
central silk board act, coffee act so on and so forth.
reference where of was made by mr. shanti bhushan need
not be examined for the purpose of considering the legislative competence.
i will place it if your lordships permits me. the legislative competence
of parliament to legislate these statutes is not in issue before this
court and, therefore, we do not think it necessary to examine the
question of legislative competence only from academic view point insofar as these legislations are concerned.
however, prima facie, there is no substance in the apprehension expressed
by mr. shanti bhushan that narrow approach of the concept of 'industry'.
no, not this one my lord. just see following sentence.
as and when these acts are challenged.
i'll answer that because in this case, this question
was raised because no one has challenged the central act.
therefore. i'll just. kindly give me just a minute.
just two sentences after that. what the chief justice was trying to say.
i will cull it out and give it to your lordships.
actually, tika ramji dealt with a process anterior to
manufacture, namely acquisition of the raw material which is sugarcane.
they said that the acquisition of the raw material would not
be comprehended within the expression of the word 'industry' under entry 52.
my lord, even the end product right.
in our case, entry 8 covers not just intoxicating liquors, but it covers.
production and manufacturing. production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase, and even sale of intoxicating liquor.
everything.
so, really speaking, entry 8 would cover the entire gamut of entry 52 as well.
that's what mcdowell says.
that's why a specific entry having been made by the founders
or the framers of the constitution, the entry 8 must govern.
kindly have, my lord, para 45. kindly have para 45.
para 45 your lordship would find.
and in this case, they struck down the idr specification even though.
kindly have para 45.
true, the challenge was to the vires of the state legislation that is page.
yes. and not to the parliamentary legislation.
but at the same time, the entire basis of challenge was that in respect of
sugarcane, only parliament had the power to legislate on account of field being covered under
entry 52, list i. the sugar industry having been included in the entry and the
connotation of industry being verified to include in it raw materials and sugarcane as well.
thus, the exclusive power of parliament to legislate was urged
as the main ground to seek invalidation of the state legislation.
the field of sugarcane is not available to the state legislature to legislate.
that's what was argued.
and 46 were in view of the controversy as aforesaid, the fact that
the validity of the parliamentary legislation was not an issue n the tika
ramji case, does not in any manner affect the ratio of that division.
the point for determination in that case was substantially the same
as in the present case, namely, the scope of the expression
'industry' in entry 52 list i and entry 24 list ii.
there also the point was to adopt a
narrow or a wide interpretation of the expression industry.
further, the fact that it was a case of manufacturing industry
under idr act also does not affect the ratio of the case.
the interpretation placed in tika ramji cannot be
confined to industry, falling under idr act alone.
there is neither any express or implied indication in that decision to limit the scope.
then kindly have 50, my lord, which is important at page 260.
50, my lord.
the petitioners in tika ramji's case in support of the wide
construction to be placed upon the expression 'industry' also relied upon
various decisions interpreting the said term in relation to industrial disputes act.
what we are concerned here is not the wide construction to be put
on the term industry as such, but whether the raw material of an
industry which forms an integral part of the process are within the topic
of industry, which form the subject matter of item 52, list i as
ancillary or subsidiary matters which can fairly or reasonably be said to be
comprehended in that topic and whether the central legislation while legislating upon sugar
industry could, acting within the sphere of entry
52 of list i as well, legislate upon sugarcane.
this court said that if the legislation with regard to sugarcane came
within the exclusive province of the central legislature under entry 52 of
list i, the enactment passed by the provincial legislature would be ultra vires.
your lordships, kindly come to the next point.
your lordships have already seen the gist of all these cases.
kindly come to para 57.
para 57, 1630 mr. shanti bhushan, however, contends that once the field is
covered by entry 52, by issue of requisite declaration and parliament has actually
covered the field by enacting a legislation with regard to that extent, the
industry, including all facets of such an industry, whether it is raw material
or the products of that industry the state legislature will have no power to legislate.
the contention is that the expression 'industries' in entry 52 list i, comprises in
it all its aspects, commencing from procurement of raw material and up to the
disposal of final product of that industry, not only the process of manufacture or production.
the submission of learned counsel is that the expression 'industries' in the entries under
consideration is not given such interpretation, it would denude the parliament of the real
objective control and such industry in particular in public interest, which is of paramount importance.
as against this, the contention of the other side is that
the acceptance of a viewpoint propounded by shri shanti bhushan would
mean denuding the state legislature of the power to legislate in respect.
my lord. views of mr. bhushan were negative.
negative. now come straight to para 78.
why do they say so? come to 78.
reliance was also placed. acceptance of the argument of mr. shanti bhushan.
the acceptance of the argument. i'm just.
acceptance of the argument of mr. shanti bhushan would make various entries
in the state list otiose and meaningless and subject to entry 52
of list i, despite the fact that the entries are not so.
now come to para 82.
where he also relied on entry 54 of the
union list and entry 23 of the state list.
and what is the ultimate finding?
the structure and scope of entry 54 of the union list and entry 23
of the state list and their inter-relationship is substantially different from the scope and
structure of entry 24 of the state list and entry 52 of the union list.
the entry relating to development of mines and minerals has in
it both the industry of mines and the product of minerals.
and therefore on a declaration both mines and
minerals get embedded in 54 of the union list.
therefore, it has been consistently held by this court that the
declaration under entry 54, parliament evinces an intention to occupy the field.
then kindly have the next one too.
the constitution bench in belsund sugar. this is again a constitution bench.
examined the question regarding the legality of levy of market
fee under the provisions of bihar agricultural produce markets act,
1960 pertaining to various commodities including sugarcane, sugar, molasses, wheat and tea.
the court first dealt with the transaction of purchase of sugarcane
by the sugar factories functioning in the market areas falling within
the jurisdiction of respective market committees constituted under the market act.
it noticed that the market act had been enacted by the bihar
legislature as per the legislative power mentioned in it by entries 26,
27 and 28 of list ii of the seventh schedule of the constitution.
the court, however, noticed that the markets dealt with the supply and distribution of goods
as well as trade and commerce therein as it seeks to regulate the sale and
purchase of agricultural produce to be carried on in the specified markets under the act.
to that extent, the court said, the provisions of entry 33 of list
iii override the legislative powers of the state legislature in connection with legislations
dealing with trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of goods.
thus, to the extent to which the market act seeks to regulate the transactions of
sale and purchase of sugarcane and sugar which are foodstuffs and trade and commerce therein,
the constitution bench said that it has to be held that the market act being
enacted under the topic of legislative powers under entries 26, 27 and 28 of list
ii will be subject to any other legislation under entry 33 of the concurrent list.
the contention of mr. dwivedi, however, that as admittedly the tobacco is not
foodstuff and does not fall under entry 33 of list iii, like the
amendment to the constitution made in 1953, the parliament by further amendment of
the constitution can, if so advised, place tobacco - raw material of the
industry - in entry 33 of list iii and, thus, confer on itself
the competence to legislate in respect to tobacco, need
not be examined by this court as being unnecessary.
what we may, however, note that the constitution bench, after noticing various provisions of
the act and the rules, came to the conclusion that the need for regulating
the purchase, sales, storage and processing of sugarcane, being an agricultural produce, is completely
met by the comprehensive machinery provided by the
sugarcane act enacted by the same very legislature which.
now, your lordship may perhaps.
then the paragraph 87, they notice other decisions which have followed this logic.
88, the principles aforesaid would equally apply to
entries 14, 27, 28, and 66 of list ii.
it may further be noticed that in para 170 of belsund sugar company's case,
the constitution bench reiterates the view expressed in tika ramji's case as also in
siel's case affirming full bench of the allahabad high court in shriram industrial enterprises.
in view of the above we see no compelling reason either on account of
binding preceding in the form of earlier constitution bench judgment, history and background of
the framing of the constitution or other words used in various entries of the
language of any article in the constitution of india, to take a view which
will result in denuding the power of state legislatures to legislate not in respect
of field of legislation under entry 24 but field of legislation covered by other
entries in state list on making of declaration under entry 52 of the union list.
the constitution bench judgment in the case of tika ramji and
other decisions following it confine the field of legislation of industries
to 'the process of manufacture or production' and not to 'raw materials' .
in view of the aforesaid, i conclude as under.
the state legislations and the tobacco board act, 1975 to
the extent of sale of tobacco in market area cannot co-exist.
so tobacco board act is a central legislation.
state legislation, and the tobacco board act cannot co-exist.
the state legislatures are competent to enact legislations providing for sale of agricultural produce of
tobacco in market area and for levy and collection of market fee on that produce.
parliament is not competent. kindly you look at this?
parliament is not competent to pass legislation in respect of goods enumerated
in the aforesaid conclusion no. 2, while legislating in the field of
legislation covered by entry 52 of the union list under which parliament
can legislate only in respect of the industries, namely 'the process of manufacture and production'.
so even though here parliamentary declaration law was not
in question, yet they said parliament cannot do it.
a declaration was issued.
my lords, once your lordships come to the conclusion
that the scope of the entries is to be delineated.
you can't delineate that in the light of the parliamentary legislation.
then again, the question would be under which entry the law falls.
and if lordships come to the conclusion that
encroaches on the state list, it has to.
and that is where the question of your lordship in jayant verma's
case, the dominant legislature will always have the power despite the fact
that there is a parliamentary legislation covering the ancillary and incidental factors.
justice ruma pal's judgment from para 110 onwards, it's is a very illuminating.
your lordships may also have para 94.
which had come earlier, but then i would.
1647. but 94 is very clear.
although parliament cannot legislate on any of the entries in state list, it
may do so incidentally while essentially legislating within the entries under union list.
conversely, the state legislature will encroach on the union list when such an
encroachment is merely ancillary to an excise of power intrinsically in the state list.
the fact of encroachment does not affect the vires of the law.
even as regards the area of encroachment.
this principle, commonly known as doctrine of pith and substance
does not amount to extension of the field of legislation.
it does not amount to extension of the legislative fields.
therefore, such incidental encroachment in either event does not deprive
the state legislature in the first case or parliament in
the second, of their exclusive powers under the entry so encroached upon.
in the event the incidental encroachment conflicts with legislation actually
enacted by the dominant power, the dominant legislation will prevail.
i'll tell you, as we are rising today that
is the heart of what we have to consider.
that's something which is worrying me. and we're still open on this aspect.
my lord, i thought i had closed it down.
just maybe five minutes tomorrow on this.
the process of reflection never stops until the last word is said.
tika ramji said that the word 'industry' means 'the process of manufacture
or production' and that it does not include the raw materials used
in the industry or the distribution of the products of the industry.
the distribution of the products is entry 26 and 27.
raw materials was not covered by entry 52, that is tika ramji.
if you come down now to itc which we are reading.
itc dealt with the market fairs because of the agricultural produce market committee.
justice ruma pal and the other judgment, justice sabharwal says that applying the
logic of tika ramji, the regulation of markets and fairs under entry 28.
are not subject to entry 52. are not covered by industry, right?
and therefore, entry 66, the power to levy market
fees is preserved for the states that is itc.
the real problem, which we are.
the conundrum which we face is this that entry 52 covers production, manufacture, expressly,right?
entry 8 covers production, manufacture expressly.
so, there's a complete overlap between entry 52 and entry 8.
now, one answer to that is this that if you read therefore, both of
them as overlapping and entry 52 as having predominance where entry 8 is rendered otiose.
but where the two entries are so completely overlapping because both
cover production and manufacture, entry 8 expressly, entry 52 by interpretation
that we have placed since tika ramji, then what will prevail?
no. kindly have entry 52 once again my lord, for just a minute.
entry 52.
you see tika ramji and all the cases subsequently were able
to skirt around this issue because there is no absolute overlap.
tika ramji was before then this last judgment is after markets and fees.
this is a case which is directly and squarely an overlap between the two.
that is the problem which. that may not be the correct due of tika ramji.
in every case, my lord, right from tika ramji till date what the union
and the petitioners have emphasized is that entry 52 will include not only manufacturing.
just while we are rising, just see justice ruma pal's judgment.
paragraph 126 and then we'll rise. and we'll also reflect upon it in the night.
to sum up, learned judge says, at page 1659.
to sum up, the word industry, for the purposes of entry 52 of list
i has been firmly confined by tika ramji to the process of manufacture production only.
subsequently, decisions, including those of our other constitution benches have reaffirmed
that tika ramji's case authoritatively defined the word 'industry' to mean
'the process of manufacture or production', and that it does not
include raw material used in the industry or the distribution of the product.
given the constitutional framework and weight of the judicial authority, it
is not possible to accept the argument canvassing a wider meaning.
my lord, this is the critical. just go ahead.
to accept argument canvassing a wider meaning of the word industry,
whatever the word may mean in the other context, it must
be understood in the constitutional aspect as meaning manufacture or production.
now just see para 127.
applying the negative test as evolved in the tika ramji in this case, it
would follow that the word 'industry' in entry 24, list ii, and consequently, entry
52 of list i does not and cannot be read to include entry 28
and 66 of list ii, which has been
expressly marked out as fields within the state's exclusive.
my lords this is the. just read that para, then we'll read.
as noted earlier, entry 28 deals with markets and fairs and entry 66 with
the right to levy fee in respect of in present context, markets and fairs.
entry 52 of list i does not override entry 28
in list ii nor has entry 28 in list ii
been made subject to entry 52, unlike entry 24 of list ii.
this court in belsund has also accepted the argument, entry 28 of list ii
operated in its own and cannot be affected by any legislation pertaining to industry.
my lord, this part. now just see para 120, just one sentence.
if 'industry' does not include markets and fairs,
it is important to define what markets and fairs.
then learned judge discusses this.
therefore, all these judgments really say that look, entry 52 does
not cover the activity which is being legislated upon by the state.
and therefore, in one case, raw materials the state
can legislate, markets and fairs the states can legislate.
we are now in a situation where both
are exactly on all fours together, production and manufacture.
please have a relook at calcutta gas and mcdowell.
then what happens? there they are dealing with industry.
in calcutta gas, constitution bench was dealing with industry, gas and gas works.
entry 25 list ii. there are two possible answers.
one, is to say which is the pro state, or we say
the pro-federal principle that if the entry is not made subject to
a central entry then the state entry must have its full operation.
the other is to apply.
though the constitution is federal, the constitution is federal with a certain weight
in favour of the centre and then say that where the two entries
overlap then article 246(1) will prevail because it covers exactly the overlapping field.
there are two opposing viewpoints. question is, which one to adopt?
i'll come back tomorrow morning with fresh ammunition perhaps, my lords.
another tentative answer, my lords, if i may offer.
just one second, brother.
chief justice has given you a lot of food for thoughts, mr. dwivedi.
definitely, my lord but. i may provide you some drink for thoughts.
you are talking about different intoxicating liquor, some require ageing, some does not require ageing.
some are fair, some are dark.
but perhaps it may not be comprehensible to some members of the bench.
would material exhibit help?
the best thing would be, my lord, to
send a bottle to each one of the.
this is all in lighter vein.
i told brother jamshed, as we were rising for the lunch,
that you have become a domain expert by mr. dwivedi's argument.
i'm. certainly i must admit that i am fond of liquor.
i don't mind claiming that. i seek, my lord.
in a lighter vein, my lord, we had a trademark case,
so we brought actual bottles to show the court and went
for lunch, by the time we came back, they all were consumed.
i seek, my lords.
i seek, my lord, in this matter i'm appearing for ut of puducherry.
the registry is not accepting my vakalat.
may i be permitted to. yes. obliged, my lord.
