my lord, before the petitioner starts, my lord, we had something to say on the scope of the reference, not obviously on the merits of the case.
my lord, i've already circulated, my lord, my note on that, and all on this side, my lord are ad idem to persuade your lordships.
my lord, the last point first. in our understanding… i'm sorry, my lords.
my apologies. my lord, as per our understanding, what is referred for your lordships, consideration of nine hon’ble judges is interpretation of article 39(b) and not article 31c.
these are my lord, the broad grounds, my lord, i'm just… 31c, even that issue of revival will arise, right?
because that will deal... it will not arise, my lord.
that's what, my lord, i would wish to my lord, point out.
kindly have a look at my lord, my note, which is ii b. volume ii a. ii b, ii b, my lord.
two, capital ‘b’. ii b, my lord.
roman ii, capital ‘b’. it's a separate volume, my lord.
it was sent yesterday, my lord. ii b, my lords.
ii a is additional written submissions of respondents, my lord.
ii b is short note on behalf of… the file name is ‘short note on behalf of sg’, my lord.
if it can be… i'm not going to read the entire note, my lord, whatever is relevant.
it's there in the link also. you have it sameer.
it's in the convenience compilation, also. the link that we've sent, it has been added in that.
we're just uploading it. so, on the lighter vein on this side you are trying to make our task easier by saying that there's only one issue and not… that's how, my lord, our understanding of, my lord the chronology is.
…  then go to the reference. kindly.
that's the referring order also, if your lordship looks at it.
it's only the issue referred is that if the material resources of the community, whether they include private property or not.
if the learned solicitor permits let us… the issue, that issue will arise if we come to the conclusion that 31c is revised, right?
your lordship is right. issue is there, but that's not referred because that's already covered by so many judgments.
the question is, the ambit of 39(b) will arise provided 31c exist today.
if 31c does not exist, then there's no question about the ambit of whether that will include ‘b’.
39(b), my lord can still survive, my lords.
it's an independent provision, as a directive principle.
the only… 31c i was saying. but that's not referred.
correct, my lords. if your lordship wants to expand the reference that's another thing, my lords.
but it's not referred. it's in fact covered by the njac judgment.
because if there were no… if, no, doctrine of revival, half the judges of our court wouldn't be here today.
no, no, otherwise… otherwise, my lord, just a little… it’s covered.
they've considered it. alright. anyway, now the note is uploaded.
please, kindly, come to, my lord para 2 at page 2.
page 2? page 2, my lord. this was the 1996 the property owners’ association, the first judgment, i'm referring to.
i'm not reading everything. para two. ’ the said reference, it was argued by the petitioners, that article 31c does not survive in the constitution anymore…’ your lordships, have?
‘…anymore after the decision in minerva mills. on the contrary, it was argued on behalf of the respondent, that only a portion of 31c, as inserted by the constitution, 25th amendment, was declared unconstitutional in the judgment in kesavananda bharati and remaining portion would remain…’ my lord, i'm pointing out that the court was conscious of these two provisions and a possible interlinking.
my lord, thereafter, your lordships, may come to my lord, 3, sub-third para… my lord, unnumbered paragraph.
‘the judgment in minerva mills struck down section 4 of the constitution, 42nd amendment. on the basis of the same and subsequent judgment in waman rao, sanjeev coke manufacturing company it was argued that it was obvious position in law, that 31c as it stood after the judgment in kesavananda bharati would remain enforced. in essence, the argument of the petitioner at the said time was that, the doctrine of revival as it applies to ordinary statute, would not apply in india to constitutional amendment as their subsequent declaration as unconstitutional on the touchstone of ‘basic structure of the constitution’, etc.' my lord, please come to para 5, 'when the said matter came up for hearing before five hon’ble judges, in the judgment reported in property owners’ association....' my lord, i have given the page number, '... rather than dealing with the question raised concerning application of doctrine of revival and its applicability to constitutional amendments in india, which had a bearing on article 31c, the court dropped the said issue and referred a separate issue to a bench of not less than seven judges.' my lord, i have quoted from that hon’ble five-judges bench, 'having heard the counsel at length, we are of the opinion that the views expressed in sanjeev coke require reconsideration. keeping in view the importance of the point in issue namely, the interpretation of article 39(b), it will be appropriate if these cases are heard by a larger bench of not less than seven-judges.' my lord, then it comes, my lord, before the hon’ble seven judges, my lord.
my lord, seven judges in state of karnataka vs ranganatha reddy… my lord, there were two opinions delivered.
my lord, one by my lord, justice untwalia who was in majority four and minority by justice krishna iyer.
but justice untwalia categorically notes, that though we are not touching this issue, we are not approving or we are not concurring with the minority view, merely because we have not touched upon, may not be treated as our having concurred with that view.
now para 7. ‘the reference of five-judges in property owners’ association, i.e., five hon’ble judges, therefore, notes that the judgment in sanjeev coke has adopted the interpretation of article 39(b), as provided by justice krishna iyer in raghunatha reddy on the basis of the same…’ ranganatha reddy.
i'm so sorry. ranganatha, my apologies, my lord, ranganatha reddy.
‘…on the basis of the same, the five judges… five judge bench in the property owners’ association opined, that the views expressed in sanjeev coke concerning the interpretation of article 39(b), requires reconsideration and only referred the said issue to a larger bench of not less than seven judges.
’ now, my lord, seven judges, my lord.
para 10, your lordships can come to.
'during arguments before the said bench, a judgment of nine hon’ble judges in mafatlal industries was highlighted on the issue of interpretation of article 39(b). after taking note of the same, the seven judge bench at para five, referred the following question to a bench of nine hon’ble judges. having given due consideration, we are of the opinion that this interpretation of article 39(b) requires to be reconsidered by a bench of nine learned judges. we have some difficulty in sharing the broad view that material resources of the community under article 39(b) covers what is privately owned. therefore, the only issue before the present bench is whether the phrase, material resources of the community under article 39(b) covers, what is privately owned. despite the said obvious position, the petitioners have in great detail made submissions on whether 31c survives or… in the constitution or not.' that's why, my lord, i am pointing this out, at the outset.
their written submissions give details. 'in this regard, it is submitted that apart from the fact that said issues stand concluded by multiple judgments of this court, including judgment in kesavananda bharati, which specifically upheld constitutional 25th amendment act, it is clear from a reading of reference order of five judges and seven judges in present proceedings, that the said issue has not been referred to a larger bench of nine judges. my lord, then 13. ‘the petitioners have in great detail further placed the challenge to a new provision of mhad act and specifically chapter viii-a of the said act. it is submitted that constitutionality of a state act and individual provisions of the said act, which would involve application of various other constitutional principles and fundamental rights....' my lord, it should be, '... may not be adjudicated by a larger bench of nine judges as the same may have grave repercussions, etc., etc.' and at the end, page 16, my lord.
this is what our understanding of the reference is.
page 16, my lord. ‘only issue concerning the interpretation of article 39... just, just one second, we are just… taking us.... page 16 or? one, six, my lord. page 16. page 16? 16, my lord. page 16 is our understanding of the reference, my lord. therefore, it is submitted. therefore, it is submitted. ‘that only issue concerning the interpretation of article 39(b) and whether the phrase ‘material resources of the community’ includes private property or not has been referred to the present bench of nine learned judges.
the interpretation of article 31c or its revival or non-revival, has not been referred, and the validity of this act is not referred.
’ my lord, because, i believe bengal also has a similar act and they are also here.
…intervention by bengal. my lord, so they would also… we will be supporting on...
mr. solicitor, let's go in the reverse way.
we’ll tread the path of least resistance.
in insofar as 'c' is concerned, where you say don't decide the validity of the mhad act in a combination of 9, that there may be some substance in what you say, subject to hearing the other side of course, that will turn upon analysing the individual provisions, looking at the impact of various decisions and ordinarily, that's always left to the regular bench.
regular benches, my lord. that's one aspect.
now coming to (b), we see that...
would your lordships, like to read the reference order my lord?
we’ll see the reference order immediately. but according to you, look, the fact that 31c… the principle that 31c in its original form, stands revived, as upheld in the 25th amendment, upheld in kesavananda.
that is now according to you, that has been the position in our law, don't unsettle it, because we don’t… you want 31c to remain there and the government obviously, we understand why....
otherwise, also, my lord, kindly take it… my lord, absolutely logically, without going into the merits.
suppose, someday after 40 years, some mad parliament, deletes part iii.
because if we come to the conclusion… if we come to the conclusion, 31c does not stand… 31c does not stand revived, then, of course, that will affect a whole lot of legislation.
my lord, suppose… i'm giving a very extreme example.
my lord, suppose some parliament in its wisdom, or lack of it, deletes part iii.
comes before your... the deletion comes before your lordships.
your lordships, sets aside the amending act.
would there be a vacuum? the answer is, ‘no’.
the fundamental rights will come back. the part iii will come back.
it's as simple. my lord, kindly come to...
that’s the point to be considered. right.
my lord, volume v… if i am not… volume v, the reference order...
let’s do this. now, let's hand it over to mr. parekh.
only… we’ve got your point. let him read the reference order and then tell us about where these issues arise from.
lordships, absolutely. let me just place what the issue is.
what are the reference orders? how it comes here?
we’ve got your point now. but let's not pre empt his argument.
he can make that argument. once he makes an argument on the scope of the reference, we feel that we should allow you at that stage to respond to him, we'll call upon you certainly  if necessary.
what is sought to be suggested, additionally, that if the court were to hold that 39(b) is confined to only natural resources and not to any other resource.
then, the 31c argument may not even be necessary.
unless the court crosses that. if the contrary is held in...
our court has said that well, 39(b) would not appear to cover private property, whether material resources of the community would extend to private property or otherwise… tentatively reference does say, my lord.
that's what. we are not able to subscribe to that view.
that's what my lord, we say. but let's hear mr. parekh.
let him open and then we'll get back to you.
certainly. lordships, i'm grateful. in fact, state of maharashtra first filed detailed submissions on all the issues, then wiser counsel probably prevailed.
they've withdrawn that and now filed this note.
lordship. so, may i just indicate my lords, just to start with, just a little background and… i'm appearing in six petitions before, my lords.
we challenge… five of them challenge chapter viii-a.
we are in appeal and there's an independent....
so, you'll be making the argument, the initial argument, with the six matters.
then who will follow? mr. andhyarujina you’ll be arguing… mr. andhyarujina, mr. … i am addressing, your lordships on two issues.
my lord, actually the issue of 31c.
my lord, i have three broad... three broadways i've prepared.
i want to give your lordships, a brief legislative history of it.
i wanted to point out why my learned friend, solicitor general is, in fact, incorrect.
my lord, the question of 31c arises both as a point of reference.
it arises out of the coelho case, which is expressly referred to your lordships… it arises is out of?
coelho case. coelho. coelho case, my lord.
my learned friend, has repeatedly corrected me on the pronunciation… on the coelho case.
and it even otherwise arises squarely, my lord, in this constitutional challenge, as i will show your lordships.
so, my lord the reference point is the least of...
we were only on what is the lineup of counsel on your side?
so, it's going to be… we are sharing the submissions.
i'll be going on two aspects of the matter.
the first aspect of the matter is, can they at all seek the protection of 39c in view of the province of 39c.
we just want to know who are the counsels?
we know about time and everything. just so that it's clear to, your lordship also.
my lord, mr. parekh, my lord is giving the opening remarks.
lord, he will take about one, one and a half hours.
subject to what happens here my lord, he might take your lordships to lunch, my lord.
after lunch... i am proposing to start after lunch, and my rough estimate is two sessions, roughly.
i'll be opposing the intervention application of state of west bengal.
all right. i am appearing in one of the...
why didn't you all do this, put your appearances down on a slip of paper and give it to the court master that he'll circulate it to all of us.
our matter is arising from the west bengal case pending before five judges bench.
the bench itself said that it would take up our matter after the sentence is over, and therefore we want to intervene.
so far as states are concerned my lord, everyone, my lord assistance coming from everyone i am not opposing west bengal or any state's intervention.
which i would like assistance should kind consideration.
sorry, not right now. eleventh schedule and twelfth schedule.
please sit down. i will hear mr. parekh first.
my lord, to begin with, just to give a little summary of what are the issues and what is under challenge.
there are six matters, so there are challenges.
one relates to chapter viii-a of the mhad act in maharashtra, relates to the island city of mumbai now.
and the second challenge is to the maharashtra rent control act which is in writ petition 660 of 1998.
and one of the reasons, of course, why we filed a writ petition is that there is an earlier judgment of this hon'ble court, malpe vishwanath acharya, which has already held that the rent, bombay rent control act was void.
the provisions relating to rent and following that, the court adopted a method where they did not strike down the act, but stated that a new act should be formulated which was in the process and specifically holds that if the new act does not take care of the issues raised in malpe, then the new act would also be void.
so that's the background to the. maharashtra rent control act is in writ petition of 660 of?
double 60 of 1998. now we had, in fact the two matters, malpe vishwanath and this one actually were tagged together at one stage.
they were de tagged and the malpe got decided and this, of course, is still awaiting, my lord's decision.
now, just to give a background, these petitions relate to temporary provisions which were brought in during world war ii, 1939.
with effect from 1st january, 1939. they've continued all these times.
they've only been, so to say, two increases in rent, while the wholesale price index, and we've given that data, has risen from seven to over 1000, but the rents have remained frozen.
before malpe case, there was only one increase of 5%, plus some increase relating to repairs which were carried out, et cetera.
and thereafter once the maharashtra rent act has come in then another 5% provisions are there.
now because the rent followed.. our court, followed justice venkataramiah's victim in motor general traders, saying that a law which is valid on the date of its enactment may cease to become valid by a flux of science and therefore, they said that a world war ii and law which froze the rents as of 19… 1940 cease to have validity by just the lapse of time.
you can't deprive landlords of a right to demand parent and the court gave a certain time window.
that's when the maharashtra rent control act came, correct.
they took the cut-off date as ‘97. right? they took but because ‘97, ‘87… ‘87. but a 4% increase every year. correct, but because the rents were already frozen for the premises it actually went back to january 1939, because from ‘39 to ‘87 there had been no change except one increase of 5% that's a broad challenge. that's a broad challenge. and, in fact, so that's the rent control act and if i succeed on that, in fact, my second challenge becomes easier because chapter viii-a provides that if 75, 70% of the occupiers decide to acquire the property, then they have to pay 100 times the rent of the property. monthly rent, not even yearly rent. pay 100 times the rent and you become the owner of the property, and it's occupied, not even tenants. and we'll, of course, make our submissions on that. now, if i succeed on the rent control, and the rent is invalid, then possibly my challenge to viii-a becomes much easier. on viii-a also, i'll, of course, independently make my submission. now, my lord, this matter comes through, before your lords, nine-judge bench combination by four reference order, first two judges referred it to three, three to five, five to seven and seven to nine. so may i just very quickly indicate before briefly indicating the facts, the three reference orders. first one, gives no reasons, so i'm not taking my lords to that. the first one from three to five, is 1st may 1996. and if my lord has volume v, of the convenience compilation... it starts at page 2787. volume v, page 2787. lordship. 1996... 4 scc, page 49. my lords has paragraph 1 on the next page. 'one of the main questions for decision in these matters pertains to the constitutional validity of chapter viii-a inserted in 1986 in maharashtra housing area development act, we all call it, mhada. hereafter, referred to as mhad act, providing for acquisition of certain properties on payment of 100 times the monthly rent for the premises. these properties are mainly buildings which were first let out prior to the year 1940 on monthly rent, which the owner claimed as a measly amount of current value of property in bombay and the present value of the rupees. section 1a was inserted in the mhada act in '86. and it contains a declaration that this act is for giving effect to the policy of the state, towards securing principles specified in clause b of article 39 of the constitution of india. article 31c of the constitution is therefore, attracted for excluding the attack to the validity of the enactment on the ground of article 14 or 19 of the constitution.' if i may just give a few comments while reading this, 21 is not protected under this. similarly, 300a is also not protected. so, we will be making submissions on that. and also, 31c, my lord, now in  in matter is laid down, that the reasons must be given to the president. because that presidential approval is required for two reasons. one is because there's a conflict between a central law and the state law. in fact, three laws in this case, including transfer of property act. so, you must indicate to the president why you are seeking consent. and if that indication is not there that presidential consent is not valid, in this case, no material has been produced and we will be making that point. my lords, para 2. in order to circumvent the effect of article 31c of the constitution, justice nariman, the learned council for the petitioner contended inter-alia that 31c does not survive because of the un. subsequent to the decision in kesavananda bharati. shri desai, the learned council for the respondent replied to those arguments by contending that 31c has originally enacted, minus the latter part, which was declared to be unconstitutional in kesavananda bharati, as it upheld in minerva mills, excluded any attack on the constitutional validity of the enactment. both the learned counsels had submitted synopsis of their rival contention in the form of written submission. a brief history of article 31c would help to appreciate the rival contentions. article 31c has originally enacted was inserted in the constitution, with effect from 20th april 1972 by section 3 of the constitution, 25th amendment act 1971. the constitutional validity of article 31c was examined in kesavananda bharati, which was decided on 24th april 1973, at page 1001 of scr. the conclusion of the majority opinion is summarized, wherein conclusion number five is the second part of article 31c, namely, and no law containing a declaration that it is for giving effect to such policy shall be called in question in any court on the ground that it does not give effect to such policy, was declared to be invalid. while the rest of article 31c was appealed, is valid. thereafter, with effect from 3/1/1977 by the constitution 42nd amendment act section 4, the word the principle specified in clause b and c of 39, the words, 'all or any of the principal laid down in article 4' was substituted. then on 15/5/1978 was introduced in parliament, wherein clause 8 was to amend article 31c to restore it to the position prior to the amendment by the constitution 42nd amendment, in the form as it stood as a result of the decision in kesavananda bharati. our clause 8 of the bill was dropped after debate in parliament. and this attempt at the parliament was abortive. then came the decision in minerva mills. the operative part of the order in minerva mills was pronounced on 9/5/1980. and the reason for the same were pronounced on 31/7/80. the basis of which decision in respect of 31c was rendered in minerva mills, as is indicated in paragraph 24. the next question, which we have to consider is whether the amendment made by section 4 of 42, amendment to article 37, one of the constitution is valid. mr. palkhivala did not challenge the validity of the unamended article 31c, and indeed, that could not be done. the amended article 31c forms the subject matter of separate proceeding, and we have indicated therein, that it is constitutionally valid to the extent it was appealed in kesavananda bharati. in minerva mills section 4 of the constitution 42nd amendment act was held to be invalid and decision was rendered on the basis that 31c continued in the form in which it existed as a result of the decision of kesavananda bharati. the next decision in waman rao, wherein the operative order was pronounced on 9/5/1980 and the reasons were pronounced in 13th november 80, these are reported in 1980 so and so. in waman rao also, minerva mills it was assumed that 31c as it stood prior to its amendment by the constitution, 42nd amendment, as a result of the decision kesavananda bharati stood revived. the decision in sanjeev coke, decision is sanjeev coke versus bharat coking coal. even though in sanjeev coke there is criticism of the majority opinion on minerva mills, expression of broad agreement, with the view of justice bhagwati as he then was in that decision the judgment proceeds on the basis that 31c stood revived. if i return to the next paragraph, and come to just the last two, three lines, if my lords, permits or should i.... let me just read the whole paragraph. one of the submissions of shri nariman is that the doctrine of revival as it applies to ordinary statute has not been applied in india to constitutional amendments. on this basis, we contended that clause 8 of the bill, 88 of 78, which was to revive 31c as it stood as a result of kesavananda bharati, having been dropped in parliament 31c as it stood as a result of kesavananda bharati, did not stand revived when the amendment was waived to the constitution 42nd amendment 1976, with effect from 3rd january 77, was later struck down. he contended that the decision in minerva mills proceeded on the basis of a concession made by mr. palkhivala, and on an assumption that 31c, as it survived as a result of kesavananda bharati stood revived after subsequent events. he submitted that.... that is not the decision in minerva mill in the question neither arose, nor was it the decision therein and decision in waman rao and sanjeev coke also proceeded on the same basis. he contended that 31c does not therefore, survive in the constitution and benefit thereof is not available, to exclude the attack to the validity of mhad act on the ground of 14 and 19 of the constitution. several other arguments are advanced as shri nariman related to his contention. mr. nariman, also referred to the word constitution, shall stand amended in accordance with terms of the bill 368 (2) to support this contention. shri nariman also contended with reference to certain decision that such a question relating to a provision in the constitution cannot be bypassed on the principle of stare decisis. so, we assured this, on the other hand, contended that the matter stand concluded by the decisions of minerva mills, waman rao and sanjeev coke, wherein the revival of 31c as it stood as a result of kesavananda bharati was not even disputed because that is obvious position in law. he also contended that there is nothing in 368(2) to support the contention of shri nariman. shri desai also submitted that it is too late to consider this question, when this is how 31c has been understood for years. the details of the arguments of both learned councils in the form of synopsis of written submissions are on record. the question is whether these points which have been raised by shri nariman should be considered and decided by a larger bench of at least five judges. shri desai submitted that since these contentions have no substance merely because related to interpretation of certain provisions of the constitution, is no ground to require hearing of the matter by a bench, not less than five judges. having heard learned counsel, so sometimes we have formed the opinion that it would be more appropriate for a bench of not less than five judges to consider and decide these questions for an authoritative pronouncement on the same. the decision in minerva mills, waman rao and sanjeev coke are all by a bench of five judges. the question in the form it is raised by shri nariman did not arise for consideration in any of the decision which are rendered on certain premises, as indicated therein, which assumption is now seriously challenged by shri nariman. even it is assumed that article 145(3) of the constitution is not attractive, it does appear to us that in order to settle the controversy on this point, which is of some significance and to avoid the questions being re agitated before another bench of less than five judges, the more appropriate course is to refer the matter for being heard and decided by a bench, not less than five judges. for the aforesaid reason, we direct the papers we laid before the learned chief justice for constituting a larger bench of not less than five judges. this is the first reference and then the matter did come up before five judges, and that is now reported at page 3150 of volume v as (2001) 4 scc. 2001? (2001) 4 scc page 455. volume 58 3150. again, a short order of two pages. i can just quickly read them. again, the background is given. my lords have volume v, page 3151, para 1? 3151, right? starts at 3150, at 3151. yes. in these cases, the main challenges to the constitutional validity of chapter viii-a, which was inserted in 1986 in the mhada act in 1976, which inter-alia provided for the acquisition of certain properties and payment of 100 times the monthly rent for the premises. by the said amendment, section 1a was also inserted in the act, and contains a declaration, that act is for giving effect to the policy of the state, towards securing the principle specified in clause b of article 39, of the constitution of india. in view of article 31c, of the constitution, the contention of the state was, that the validity of any part of the statute on the ground, that it violated article 14 or 19 of the constitution, was not permissible. the case was heard by a bench of three judges, at that time on behalf of the appellant, a contention was sought to be raised inter-alia to the effect, that 31c did not survive, because of the event subsequent to decision in kesavananda bharati case. it was also submitted before the bench that the doctrine of revival, as it applied to ordinary statutes, did not apply to the constitutional amendment. when a part of the 42nd amendment, which amended 31(c) had been held to be invalid, it did not result in the automatic revival of the unamended 31(c). in view of the aforesaid contention, which was raised by the order of 1-5-96, reported in so and so, the matter was referred to a larger bench of not less than five judges. we heard the council at a length on various issues which arise in these cases. one of the points which arises for consideration relates to interpretation of 39(b) of the constitution. in state of karnataka vs ranganatha reddy, validity of the karnataka contract carriage acquisition act ‘76 was challenged, and the question which arose was whether the state government could acquire and then transfer countersigned portion of the interstate permits to road transport corporation. two judgments were delivered, in that case, justice krishna iyer, for himself and two other learned judges, while concurring, i'm sorry, while concurring with the decision in justice untwalia, with whom three other judges agreed, interpreted 39(b) of the constitution, and then came to the conclusion, the act had direct nexus with 39(b), and by virtue of article 31c, its validity could not be challenged when the ground of it being violative of article 14, 19 (1) f of the constitution. justice untwalia in this judgment, observed that, we do not consider necessary to express any opinion with reference to article 31c read with clause b and c of article 39 of the constitution. our learned brother justice krishna iyer has prepared a separate judgment specially dealing with this point. we must not be understood, to agree with all that he has said in his judgment in this regard. the need to interpret 39(b) again arose in sanjeev coke vs bharat coking coal, while upholding the validity of coking coal mines nationalization act 1972. the two other connected enactment, the constitution bench adopted the interpretation of article 39(b) as enunciated by justice krishna iyer in the ranganatha reddy case. this interpretation has also been followed by a division bench of this court in state of maharashtra vs basantibai mohanlal khetan. the interpretation put on article 39(b) by justice krishna in ranganatha reddy case was not specifically assented to in the majority decision, but in sanjeev coke it is observation in the judgment of justice krishna iyer which has been followed. having heard the council's at length we are of the opinion that the views expressed in sanjeev coke case requires reconsideration, keeping in view the importance of the point and issue. namely the interpretation of 39(b). it will be appropriate if these cases are heard by a larger bench of not less than seven judges, the paper... your lordships... now it is very clear. ranganatha reddy.... the occasion for a reference to nine judges arises because ranganatha reddy was a decision of a bench of seven judges. now, you had the majority judgment of justice untwalia concurred in, on behalf of three other judges, that makes it four, and justice krishna iyer were concurred in with by two, so that makes it three. the majority judgment says that we... there are certain issues which have been dealt with on by justice krishna iyer on the interpretation of 39(b) and (c). we should not be read as having accepted his interpretation. justice krishna iyer has specifically held that material resources of the community will also include private probability. right. so, four judges said, 'we are not expressing any view on what has been held by justice krishna iyer'. therefore, the occasion for a reference to nine, arose because clearly the views in sanjeev coke which follows ranganatha reddy is something that this bench of five judges doesn't agree with. but they had to refer it to nine for the reason that ranganatha reddy was seven and in ranganatha reddy though it's a view of the minority on the interpretation of 39(b) that has been followed in sanjeev coke. absolutely. if you look at this now, it's, very clear that the ambit of the reference to nine judges is squarely only on the content of 39(b). your lordships is right. but there is something more that happens, which i'll just indicate... whether 31c continues to subsist or not, or whether it has been revived, is not something which has been referred to us at all. lordships, i'll indicate, there's one more reference order, and i'll just indicate it also refers to i. r. coelho, which was then pending before nine judges. ok. let’s just see that.
i'll just indicate. my lord may i have the final...
so, this one is late, before seven judges and my lord recalls that time, the understanding was that you could only refer it to the next larger bench.
but my lords may now come to (2013) 7 scc 522, which is the final reference order, which is in volume v, page 3409.
2013? it's 2013, volume vii, scc 522, volume vii scc 522, at volume v, page 3409 pdf.
my lord, may i just start, first bench of five learned judges is referred to seven.
put shortly the question is as to the interpretation of 39(b) of the constitution, which speaks of the distribution for the public goods, of ownership and control of material resources of the community.
in state of karnataka vs ranganatha reddy two judgments were delivered in the judgment delivered by krishna iyer j, speaking for himself and two other judges, the view was taken that material resources of the community covered all resources natural and man-made, publicly and privately owned.
the other judgment delivered by justice untwalia on behalf of himself and three other judges, did not consider it necessary to express any opinion with regard to 39(b).
it was, however, made clear in this majority judgment that the learned judge did not subscribe to the view taken in respect of 39(b) of justice krishna iyer.
the view taken by justice krishna, ranganatha reddy was affirmed by a constitution bench in sanjeev coke.
now, in the course of the arguments before us, the learned solicitor general for union of india and the state of maharashtra has drawn our attention to the judgment of a bench of nine learned judges in mafatlal.
speaking for himself and four other judges, jeevan reddy j said, that material resources of the community are not confined to public resources, but include all resources, natural and manmade, public and private owned is repeatedly affirmed by this court.
now, my lord, of course, we'll make our detailed submission.
but this issue never arose in mafatlal where the question was of unjust treatment.
the question of refund? was of unjust refund, whether taxes, if they are here to be void, how do you return.
absolutely. 39 b did not arise at all.
so, this issue never arose. these are just observations, and we will be submitting this as obiter.
but be that as we it may continue.
and reference was made to the case of ranganatha reddy, sanjeev coke and state of tamil nadu vs l. abu kavur bai.
having given due consideration, we are of the opinion that this interpretation of article 39(b) requires to be reconsidered by a bench of nine learned judges.
we have some difficulty in sharing the broad view that material resources of the community under 39(b) covers what is privately owned.
now, next paragraph is important, given that there is some similarity in the issue here involved and in i. r. coelho vs state of tamil nadu, which already stands referred to a larger bench, preferably of nine judges.
we are of the view that these matters should be heard by a bench of nine learned judges immediately following the year in i. r. coelho.
now, i have to indicate this coelho has nothing to do with 39(b)27.
the issue there was, even though it's been put in the ninth schedule, are 14, 19 and 21 available to the extent they affect the basic structure and there are observations there, which my lords may consider in this matter also on 31c.
also, it says even though you put it in the 9th schedule, the trinity of rights under 14, 19, 21 can still be taken for the purposes of challenging a particular law, specific law.
so there, of course, there was a constitutional amendment to add it to the 9th schedule.
here, despite 31c as no such provision.
there is observation in coelho which says that i can still challenge and therefore we'll be pressing that point also.
that despite the fact, even if my lord holds that 31c survives, that it's protected by 39(b).
my right to challenge under the trinity of 14, 19, 21 still survives, which is what coelho has said so.
we will make that good. kesavananda bharati they affirmed whatever was there prior to the judgment.
incidentally it is tomorrow, 24 april 1973.
but anything thereafter has to meet the challenge.
absolutely. i'm grateful. but before my lord, if thereafter held that even acts and statutes, not just constitutional amendment, cannot be violative of the basic structure and point out there are two direct judgments.
that even acts on the standalone basis can be challenged on the ground that we have violate the basic structure.
and coelho now nine judges of my lord's court have felt the same.
now there are observation that 31c also this will apply in coelho itself.
but that issue did not squarely arise here, there.
look at the last two orders, which you have shown us, seven judge and then of five, the two orders really dwell on 39(b).
there is really no reference to 31c nor is that point specifically referred to the bench.
except in para six, in so far as they say await coelho.
so, coelho would then be that, are those rights available?
because they probably wanted to await a coelho because another nine judge.
coelho must have been on the anvil of being listed.
on the anvil of being listed that appears to be.
no. i was also appearing on coelho.
it was not under the anvil of being listed.
but we pointed out that the same issue arises there in the context of 31b, that even if you put that act in the ninth schedule, you can still challenge it on the ground of violation of the basic structure.
and that's the issue we raise here also, that even if it's protected by 31c, and we fail in all our other contention, it is still open.
and that's the short issue we want your lordships to consider.
why does a bench of nine have to consider that?
because, in fact, the coelho reference order explains that but as nine judge bench decided this issue for 31b.
so, we will indicate, my lord, as we.
it is tenuous. it is. to that limited extent, yes.
give me a moment. three ways we also discuss that may i just.
so, your lordships, we are just submitted two three possibilities.
lordship, sir. may i just, this is what we consider, i'll just place it before you and then you may consider as you, my lords may. just do it from the ambit of the reference.
i'll do that. but we thought there were three possibilities that arise in this case.
the two judgments, sanjeev coke and abu kavur bai are five judges.
ranganatha is seven judges. but minerva... mafatlal judgment is nine hon'ble judges.
now, if my lords either can hold that mafatlal is obiter, then it's open to my lords to decide this issue.
otherwise, my lords may have to consider whether it has to go higher to an eleven judge bench, in case my lord is not in my....
doesn't hold that mafatlal was obiter, and it's clearly obiter will try to make that good.
in which case it's open to my lords to decide this matter, is our first submission.
my lords will consider whether on mafatlal issue, my lords wants to consider that and we'll make it good that those were obiter observation, it had nothing to do with the issue at hand or it should go higher.
that's one issue that my lords will decide.
on 39(b) and c my lord, we are with my lords that if 39(b) and c is decided, it can go back to five judges for consideration on 31c, whether it survives or not.
but we would like to make our submissions on coelho because coelho specifically deals with the scope of challenge under 31b and c. although 31b arose there, we do want to make our submission that the same principle will squarely apply for 31c.
because if it does, then my challenges under 14, 19, 21 are still available even for these laws, even if protected under 31c.
then you can also argue that before...
we can, we can. . lordships, we can.
three judges or five judges. i will not disagree; my lords is right.
but we'll like to place coelho and then my lords may take a view on it.
alright. so now, how do you want to begin?
no, my lords, we've drafted some propositions.
i'll briefly indicate what all arises. not all of this has to be decided by my lords.
but we'll just place what we wish to argue those issues.
and then, if my lord permits, i'm proposing to read the malpe judgment and then hand it to my colleague mr. andhyarujina.
so, these are the two aspects. so may i just indicate these are the issues that we feel arise.
most of them, of course, will not have to be considered by this bench.
but i wanted to place these on, before my lords.
the first is, whether article 31c of the constitution of india survives after the judgment of this hon'ble court in minerva mills and so and so striking down section 4 of the 42nd amendment act.
now, whether chapter viii-a of mhada has received the ascent of the president of india, as required, under the provision of 31c and as decided by the judgment of this hon'ble court in kaiser-i-hind, that is, reasons were given, et cetera, and they did not produce that whether the onus of proving that the ascent of the president was in compliance with kaiser-i-hind is on the state and whether they have discharged the burden.
that again, squarely arises from the pleading, but we'll make submissions on that.
now, whether the material expression, material resource of the community occurring in 39(b) of the constitution would include private properties and whether chapter viii-a of mhada subserves the purpose of 39(b) and is for public good.
so, one, because 39(b) has two parts, material resources for public goods, so, we are submitting on both.
now, whether chapter viii-a of mhada and maharashtra act can be challenged under article 14, 19 and 21 of the constitution of india in light of i. r. coelho versus state of tamil nadu.
even if article 31c survives. in 7, whether the mhada and maharashtra intact are invalid, being contrary to 21 of the constitution of india.
now on that we are again, i'm just indicating the point 21 is not protected 31c is only for 14, 19.
21 is, 'right to life' and there are reports of the respondents themselves, their committees, which say that there are a lot of landlords who are poor, not all landlords are rich and not all tenants are poor.
lot of landlords are put in their hard-earned income in building a house, and they're not even able to survive.
all their reports, we place them on record is what will be arguing.
so, if you drive down marine drive right in, mumbai, and you see all those buildings, the art deco buildings, most of them are tenanted?
your lordships, all of them, in fact.
all of them? all of them, in fact.
my lords on the rent of most of those apartments do not exceed rs. 200 even today.
in fact, initially they were all under rs 80, the act itself notes, and now they've gone up a little bit because of taxes, et cetera.
property is relatable to the annual letting value?
no, some amount of compensation they allowed us, that's all out of the taxes.
but we are bearing the tax also, which they are not paying.
the tenants are not even paying the tax that has gone up from time to time.
and again, their report says that we are paying out of pocket.
most of us are in the negative.
issue 4, 15 and 16. 4, you have said whether the expression material resources, the community occurring in 39(b) would include private properties.
15, whether the observations in para 86 of mafatlal is obiter dictum and not binding, and 16 whether the judgment of the sanjeev coke could have upheld a certain observations made in the concurring view, that is you are referring to ranganatha reddy, but article 39(b) of the constitution, with which the majority opinion expressly did not agree instead of karnataka versus ranganatha reddy.
lordship, says, no difficulty. but we'd like to place coelho judgment before my lords, takes a final view that's all i'm saying.
what else mr...? i just indicate what are the other issues very quickly.
8 and 9 relate to article 300-a.
this is also a development after the last referral order in clay tea plantation now ...
if you take acquire property, it must be for public purposes and the compensation cannot be illusory.
' so, on this ground also, we are submitting that we are entitled to succeed.
so may i skip that. 11 - is again the coelho point that i can challenge under...
then 12 - where the maharashtra rent act is on the face of this hon'ble court judgment in malpe vishwanath -void and is liable to be struck down.
' that's the argument that if the standard rent provisions go, because of the prospective judgment, then mhada itself will go in as a consequence.
then where the maharashtra rent act - that's the writ petition of 660.
again, 'can go to a smaller bench, where the maharashtra rent act takes away the basis of malpe vishwanath acharya. then 14, is void... chapter 8a. then, my lords have already seen chapter 15-16. then 17, whether chapter 8a of mhada can at all be treated as a law of public good or in the nature of land reform, or are per se, illegal and violative of the basic structure of the constitution of india as it purports to transfer property from one private person to another private person. then whether there is any evidence to show that all landlords are wealthy and tenants are all poor. then, whether in view of report of 12th law commission finding that not all landlords... again, it's a factual.
whether the property is purchased through hard work of property owners and other predecessors can be treated as estates like jagirdari, inaamdari, zamindari - system which can be redistributed.
then whether chapter viii-a was enacted merely as a misconceived attempt to deal with their own wrong, including inter-alia, freezing of range, failure to build adequate housing as also prevent disabling the landlord from maintaining the tenanted premises while failing to maintain the same themselves.
' so, my lords, these are not all the issues we are submitting before my lord.
my lords, with that, i'll only point out one judgment, which is the malpe judgment where my lords, is already dealt with the rent act.
and then i'll request mr. andhyarujina and to take over 31...
no, you're taking 31c, right? sorry. lordships, now my lords, may i just have...
who's arguing 39(b), though? mr... malpe judgment is only on rent act and its validity.
your lordships are not concerned. it will not be convenient if we begin with the argument on 39(b)...
lordships, we can do that. of course.
we'll not prevent anyone to argue the other 31c.
no difficulty. no difficulty. then would my lords want...
i was only pointing out malpe for a few facts.
i can just point out those dates, and then that's all i want to do.
a few dates so that the rest of the submissions will make more sense in light of that.
about the relevance of malpe... all right.
what some dates you want to give us?
just dates. a few dates, i'll point out.
just quickly take them down. lordships, they're not more than 8-10 dates, so i'll just indicate.
so, this whole process started on 19-06-1939, when the bombay rent reservation act froze the rent with effect from 01-01-1939.
1939, what happened? 19-6-1939 the bombay rent reservation act came.
rent restriction act came. it is the first law which froze the rent as on 01-01- 1939.
froze the rent as of? 1st january 1939.
then there is the first bombay rent act, came on 12th may, 1944, which is the full name is - 'bombay rent, hotel rates and lodging houses rates control act.' then 13th february 1948 is a rent act which was then considered in malpe judgment.
sorry. bombay rent act was on 12th may 1944.
right? 12th may 1944. and then 13th february 1948.
it was replaced by a new law.
so, we are concerned with 13th february 1948.
then, my lords, mhada came again twice - 5th december 1977 was the predecessor mhada act and then the one we are concerned with is, 27th april 1986, which has chapter 8a, which we are concerned with.
now i'll only then give the date of the judgments.
then the judgment in malpe vishwanath acharya is 19 december 1997.
and my lord's the last date is first april 1998 is the maharashtra rent act.
judgement is on? malpe's is on 19th december 1997.
and 1st april 1997 is the maharashtra rent act.
just to give the broad dates, so that....
grateful, my lords. thank you, mr. parekh.
thank you. mr. parekh, the last date, maharashtra rent act is...?
1st april 1998, with effect from 1st april 1998.
in fact, after malpe came, they came up with notification, extended it twice, we filed this writ petition, then they brought the maharashtra act and then they amended the writ petition.
so, the 1988 judgement is with regard to which rent act of maharashtra?
maharashtra rent act of 1948. lordship.... bombay rent act is '47, not '48.
lordship. bombay rents and lodging house act is '47. i'm grateful my lord.
thank you mr. parekh. yes, mr. andhyarujina?
my lord, i have noted everything, that your lordships have said.
on 31c my lord, i just wanted to say a few words with regard to coelho, if your lordships permit.
but before your lordships take a decision on the reference, my lord.
of course, whether your lordships decide to hear it now, or whether your lordships, refer it down but it will then go to a constitution bench of five judges, my lord, is a matter for your lordship to entirely decide.
your lordship has seen the reference so, i'm not going to read them again.
your lordships is, of course, right, is that the first reference from three to five my lord, notice the 31c issue, not what i'm calling the dead letter issue about whether it is revived or whether it required validation.
my lord, in the subsequent reference in one sense that was noted but not mentioned again, and undoubtedly the reference to your lordships, today arises out of the last order.
now my lord, it's a matter of construction about how your lordships, read that last order.
and i quite appreciate, the chief justice's point that actually, the reference is on the mafatlal judgment and the 39(b) point.
but my lord, i wanted for your lordships to consider this.
i'm not sure that, my lord, it is become clear in the order, what exactly the significance of coelho is?
lord, i am fully aware of the fact that your lordships are fully seized of coelho.
but if your lordships, will hear me on that for two or three minutes, because...
coelho right? coelho only, because i believe it has a very significant bearing on 31c and on the facts of this case.
i'll just summarize it first. my lord, coelho itself was a case which was referred to nine judges.
my lord it was referred to nine judges and i will show your lordships, the reference.
but as a result of inconsistencies which were noted in the judgments of waman rao between the then chief justice, justice chandrachud and justice bhagavati's judgment and also the judgment in...
sorry, judgement in minerva mills and waman rao.
i'll show your lordships that. justice bharucha, as he was then, chief justice bharucha was then, what therefore referred the matter up.
my lord, the question that was framed before the nine judges in coelho was with reference to 31b.
it concerned the tamil nadu act for acquisition of land, my lord gudalur janmam acts, so on and so forth.
my lord the question was framed on two basis.
one is the question with regard to whether 31b is valid and the second was a question with regard to fundamental rights and with regard to the scope of fundamental rights and in particular article 14, 19 and 21 of whether they are included in the basic structure.
now my lord, as your lordships, know kesavananda has been a decision which has been constantly evolving by a process of interpretation from time to time.
although, lord the majority in minerva mills came very, very close to saying that 14 and 19 are a part of the basic structure, they didn't say so in terms.
they went on then to strike down the amended portion of 31c and upheld the unamended portion of 31c.
my lord, this question has now been squarely addressed in the coelho judgment.
i will come straight to the point, the coelho judgment now entrenches my lord, there's a little bit of controversy, i'll come to that in a bit.
but entrenches 14, 19 and 21 as part of the basic structure.
now, my lord, first to put the point a little simplistically, your lordships are fully aware of 31c.
my lord, 31c is the safe harbour provision.
in the event that 39(b) and (c) stand attracted, then there can be no challenge on the ground of 14 and 19.
your lordships are also aware that originally there was 14, 19 and 31, when the right to property got deleted, that was also consequently deleted.
now, my lord if 14 has been held now to be a part of the basic structure, the real question that arises in my respectful submission to your lordship is how effective the validity of article 31c ruled upon in kesavananda bharati remains.
my lord, i'll just tell your lordships why i say this.
as your lordships are aware in kesavananda bharati 31c, the latter part was struck down, the declaratory part.
the first part was, however, upheld. it was upheld not like everything about kesavananda bharati in a fascinating way.
my lord, six of the judges who believed in the unlimited power of the constitution to amend, upheld it.
justice khanna upheld it on a slightly different basis, drawing a parallel with 31a, although, as we all know, that justice khanna in fact believed in the implied limitation and the basic structure theory.
lord, that was interpreted, my lord, in minerva mills.
it was read through in waman rao as i'll show, your lordship.
and we are now presented with the effect of the coelho judgment.
because, my lord, the language of 31c...
i mean, your lordship will just see the wide language...
lord, in books... no interference with 14 and 19 lies.
so, ... and there's a lot to be said with regard to how you...
would your lordships mind... let’s, read the....
if your lordship, will come to 31c.
i have prepared a short note on coelho also, just come to that in a bit.
'31c - saving of laws, giving effect to certain directive principles: notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law giving effect to the policy of state towards securing...' now, my lord, this is the portion which was stuck down in minerva mills - 'all or any of the principles laid down in 39(4).' therefore, your lordship, will read it in the old language, which says, 'in relation to 39(b) and...' 37 in our books...
yes. your lordship is perfectly correct. the principles specified in clause b of clause c of article 39.
perfect, my lord. so that is, my lord, my revival argument...
... 'that'll be deemed to be void...
' ... 'shall be deemed to be void on the ground that...
' now, my lord, please note the sweep of this, my lord, that it is inconsistent with or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by article 14 and 19.
for the latter italicized portion is the portion which was struck down in kesavananda bharati.
so, my lord, today, with the coelho judgment, my lord, it is very difficult to understand what force remains in article 31c?
31c, undoubtedly valid as rule... then, mr. andhyarujina, to argue that you're virtually then asking for a reconsideration of the correctness of kesavananda bharati.
no, no, i'm fully conscious of that, my lord.
that's an outrageous argument, and my lord, the logical extension of the coelho argument may take us to kesavananda bharati, that is true.
but your lordships are presented with a 31c problem.
i have some solutions to that. my lord, if the occasion arises, i will argue that.
because what meaning is left in 31c if we say that every aspect of 14 can be used as a challenge.
but we are a bench of nine.
we are bound by the principles which have been laid down in kesavananda bharati which upholds 31c as it was originally enacted.
correct. and as originally enacted, 31c gave, as you rightly said, a safe harbour provision, in respect of a challenge to the laws giving effect to the directive principles containing 39(b) and (c) on the ground that it violates article 14 and 19 of the constitution.
now that has been upheld by a larger bench of 13.
by a bench of 13 judges. for us, that's now a dictum.
that was a given that 31c is valid.
i accept that, my lord. right. and therefore, there's no reason for us to go into the impact of coelho on the correctness of the decision in kesavananda bharati.
that is a very far-reaching proposition, your lordships are right.
and against that suggestion, if at all i may read, my lord, is of course, the minerva mills dicta, where actually they said that whatever be the case...
these walls are witnessed to what happened after kesavananda, when a review was assembled in this very court and then abruptly, it was discharged.
do not forget the history of our court.
we will now allow kesavananda to rest where it is.
no... long, may rest in peace, undoubtedly.
not may rest in peace. but it is a vibrant part of our discourse as it is today because once we open up the canvas, you know, there will be...
no, my lord, i don't say that.
not just bear with me for a minute, my lord.
now, my lord, so the minerva ...
that 31c in its original form as upheld in kesavananda...
we will, of course, see coelho for five minutes with you.
no difficulty. we'll treat 31c as upheld in its original form by kesavananda bharati, to be the position which by bench of nine judges, and then we accept it.
got accepted, my lord. but may i just point out to your lordships, that coelho presents a problem for your lordship, my lord, in this case...
in this sense. my lord, what are we to do with coelho if we accept the validity of article 31c because, i mean, your lordships sees that it is quite obvious that 31c is now effectively emasculated as far as it comes up against 14 and 19.
14 and 19 challenged now, in view of the coelho judgment is a basic structure challenge.
lord, assume that 31c was brought in for the first time by an amendment today, it would be beyond the amending power of the constitution, and being beyond the amending power of the constitution, it be void.
now my lord, i quite appreciate everything that your lordship has said, but it is a very serious issue which arises in the context of 31c.
now, i will show your lordship coelho, but coelho was a judgment actually under 31b, or the question framed in paragraph 5 was under 31...
ninth schedule. correct. ninth schedule question. my lord, they don't actually strike down 31b.
in fact, what coelho veers towards, is an exposition on fundamental rights.
and there are some questions that arise.
but one thing it does is that it entrenches these three, my lord 14, 19 and 21.
those laws which were inserted in the ninth schedule, as was the date of the judgment in kesavananda bharati are immune.
yes, your lordship is right. those laws, which were inserted in the ninth schedule after the 24 april 1973, would be still amenable to a challenge under....
which is exactly, if your lordship recalls what the majority also said in minerva mills, which is what....
waman rao. waman rao. in waman rao it was sustained, this view.
my lord, minerva mills. i will show your lordships.
waman rao and minerva mills, both. the point that i leave your lordship with and the point for consideration...
you know, really speaking why should the bench of nine go into these issues at all?
you know, the first thing you ask yourself is, why nine?
what is the occasion for nine and not seven?
and the occasion for why nine, why not seven, why not five, why not three actually, the reason for the constitution of a nine-judge bench is obviously because there's something operating in a seven judge bench, which is a matter of concern.
now, actually, in this case ranganatha reddy, the bench of seven has not said that 39(b) will include resources of a private nature, right?
majority... in fact, it is quite to the contrary.
justice specifically in his majority opinion, keeps that issue open, saying that we are not...
agreeable with... we shouldn't be construed to have agreed with justice krishna iyer’ s viewpoint.
the problem... yes. there's a specific paragraph on that.
yes, my lord. now, the problem arose because sanjeev coke lifted justice krishna iyer’ s perception on the interpretation of article 39(b) and made it a bench of five.
now, it could have been resolved by seven also.
it could have been resolved by seven by saying that look what was done in sanjeev coke was plainly incorrect because it overlooks that the view of justice krishna iyer was a view of a minority on that subject or at least a plurality and not a majority in ranganatha reddy.
but the seven judges thought that we should refer it to nine only because in the meantime, mafatlal had come.
and mafatlal had that observation para 86.
now if we come to the conclusion that look, that observation in mafatlal is obiter because mafatlal was really dealing with unjust .
there's an observation that would end the issue on mafatlal, one.
two, if we then construe the judgment in sanjeev coke to the extent of interpreting ranganatha reddy, we'll say that the bench in ranganatha reddy, the seven-judge bench has not laid down this principle at all as a principle of constitution law.
of course, we are a bench of nine we can still look at the interpretation of 39(b), whether it will apply cover private property as well.
and you may argue that, that 39(b) should not cover -- material resources of the community cannot mean material resources of a private person.
that is something which you can certainly argue before us.
i leave it up to your lordship.
as i said, it is your lordship's reference...
going into the 31c argument, here of course we are 45 minutes short of lunch.
we'll all have a conversation between ourselves.
but in the meantime. yes, my lord, i fully appreciate what your lordships have said and it is your lordship's order of reference, that is for your lordships to decide.
and of course, the 39(b) point can get us home as much as the 31c point as well.
so, my lord, that stands. 31b is essentially a validation provision.
they wanted to validate certain things by virtue of that...
the ninth schedule. ninth schedule. yes. it has a restrictive scope also.
31b has a restrictive scope. yes. what your lordship say resonates with me. in fact, that is our argument mr. devarajan will make it for us.
that actually, it is difficult to say that private property falls within 39(b).
my lord, that the so-called concurring judgment, it's called a concurring judgment delivered by justice iyer, justice krishna iyer, where he says that, "i agree with everything, but it's such an important issue, so i want to say something more on it".
he then slightly extends the principle in an axiomatic way to say that actually private property is obviously a part of 39(b), and as your lordships have rightly pointed out, subsequent judgments have picked up that observation which was made by justice krishna iyer.
if at all, the consequence the impact on this case is that it is not a part of private property, then a large part of our challenge has a good chance of succeeding.
so, that is how the impact lies on our case and your lordships, are absolutely right about 39(b).
i don't think i can say more on 31c.
your lordship's interpretation of the reference order, of course, is perfectly correct.
my lord, i had only thought that the impact of coelho was something that required consideration by your lordships, because the problem with coelho...
let's read coelho. can you show us coelho?
can i show your lordships? let's read coelho.
because... in the time left... yes, yes.
i've prepared a very short note, but i wonder, would your lordships like to see the judgment itself?
that might be better. you have your note here?
i have a note. we have extracted, actually, because all these judgments are so long so, i took the liberty of making some extracts.
it's uploaded. it's uploaded. is it uploaded?
yes. it's actually comprehensive in the sense that it's...
read the note. yes. if your lordship will...
if the court will, kindly furnish your lordship, with an email sent by my learned friend, mr. parekh my lord, at 09:56 this morning.
article 39(b) in that dichotomy, that 39(b) can never include 'private property'.
that would be very artificial. because when material resources of the community are agnostic to title, it doesn't mean that...
well, with a title... it doesn't make that distinction between a case where title rest in a private person as opposed to title in the community.
i see that point. your lordship is right.
given, for the case, mines for instance, they may be private mines.
but in a broader sense, these are material resources of the community.
that title may rest in a private individual, but these, therefore, for the purpose of 39(b), our reading should not be constricted, but must have that broad understanding of 39(b).
right. so, in a political sense. or take a case like ...
take the case like these buildings in mumbai.
technically, you're right that these are privately owned buildings.
what was the reason for the law?
we are not commenting on the legality or the validity of the law.
that will be tested independently. the reason why the state legislature came out with this was that these were all buildings, old buildings of 1940.
with the kind of monsoon in mumbai, these buildings get dilapidated because of the saline weather.
you know it better than me. because of the saline weather that, you know, the fact that the rents were so meagre that the landlords had no motive to at all to repair them.
where will the landlord poor fellow find any money to repair the buildings?
and the tenant was sitting tight. that no one tenant would have the wherewithal to repair the whole building.
therefore, the legislature had to... so, these are in a sense...
what do you mean by material resources of the community?
material resources of the community would mean resources in which the community has a vital interest.
if a building falls, the community is directly affected, because who dies when a building falls?
the occupants die. therefore, we must distance it from a title.
my lords, there is no doubt... ...
common good there is no doubt that it is not a question which is free from debate.
and there is no doubt that these considerations have to be taken into account.
because 39(b), we have to answer as a bench.
but that is a specific point raised by your lordship.
we were just discussing between ourselves. one way would be to say, accepting what the reference order says that, "look. ranganatha reddy didn't decide this issue. sanjeev coke was wrong in picking up on the judgment of the minority and then treating it as a bench of... as a majority. as a principle, and applying it in sanjeev coke. but after, even if, assuming we do that, then what? the point still survives. and i think with this issue we should resolve.... no, your lordship has to grapple with the issue substantive 39(b). ...39(b), the ambit of 39(b) is something which we should decide. that is the scope of the reference in fact. the way we take it that mr. devrajan would be arguing that 39(b) cannot include 'private property' at all. and you would be saying that it can, right? but obviously, you'll be addressing us on the matters of first principle also? yes, of course. you're not going to only rest it on sanjeev coke, because... no, no, on first principles also. your lordship may decide the ambiguity. we have to decide it. we're a bench of nine, we are not bound by any of these. that's the reference your lordship has to decide. and it will be better otherwise, again and again the same thing. there will be some finality to this because what's the point in again having a ping pong bottle that will go before seven. then seven will again have to be interpreted what mafatlal meant. at least we in 9, we can at the least say that mafatlal was obiter. yes. and then decide it. we may still come to the same conclusion. but 7 can't, then 7 will be bound by even the obiter of mafatlal. so, it may not be enough to say that mafatlal is obiter and leave it at that and send it back. that may not be appropriate. you will have to decide it. but you may decide. it's desirable that... i thought we laid the card well there that ultimately, let's not again revisit the correctness of the constitutional validity of 31c on the basis that, coelho would have some bearing on the correctness of what, because coelho was doing it in 31. in the context of 31b, coelho was bound by kesavananda bharati. i've consulted my colleagues also, and we have no objection. either way, we are happy either way. if your lordship was to hear us, we are happy. if your lordship sent me home early, i am happy with that. my lord, on the other hand... as an act of judicious statement, we should be very careful about, you have a canvas which may then have untold ramification. my lord, i fully see that. i fully see the significance of the point and we have some arguments on coelho, which we can run.... but you have put in so much of hard work. no, i'm very happy to.... in any case, there's something interesting. i will show it to your lordships in a few minutes. we will see your note. yes, my lord. and just to step back from that. so, my lord, our position... you have the academically oriented members of the bar, the attorney himself, mr. dwivedi. in any case, mr.... on a lighter note, i was telling them, all of us are material resources of the community. the only issue is not to be distributed on the private side. i think the compliment should be paid back to the bench, my lord. ....resources is the question. speaking for ourselves, my lord, we are perfectly content with that. my lord, we will argue the coelho point before a smaller bench, once your lordship takes a view on 39, there's no problem with that. my lord, we have various ways to deal with coelho, so we can do that. there's no problem. if your lordship would like to see coelho, i'm happy to show your lordship what we have. it is actually a very, very interesting issue. it is a very interesting issue for more reasons than one. i won't take more than 20 minutes. yeah, of course. 31b, of course, creates an immunity for acts in the ninth schedule. yes. but now, how do we apply the logic of coelho to 31c? that is the point. now, my lord, so, let me address your lordship first on that. so, as i pointed out to your lordship, that coelho, and the question that is also framed there, is actually a question which revolves around 31b. now, some scholars scholarly critique and criticism of coelho, has been precisely this that, it has not really answered the question with regard to 31b, at least to the fullest extent. but what coelho did was to make a very clear statement on what is included in the basic structure as far as these three rights are concerned, 14, 19 and 21. i think it would be open once again to some comment about whether it actually captured everything that it said in the judgment, in the conclusion. because in the judgment, it does suggest that, in fact, there are other fundamental rights which could also be entrenched in the basic structure, but it doesn't actually pick them up in the conclusion. my lord the other aspect of coelho which, with the greatest of respect, i say to the learned judges, they've laid out a very complicated test for testing 14 against the relevant law. my lord, they have laid out two tests. one is the 'rights test' and the second is the 'essence of rights test', which they draw back to nagraj's case, justice kapadia's judgment. my lord, when those two tests will apply, is also alluded to in coelho and it is a difficult to understand a part of coelho, where the suggestion is that the 'rights test', which they also call the 'right/impact test', will apply where an entire chapter of the constitution is abrogated, whereas the essence of rights test will apply to an individual article which stands affected or abrogated. my lords subsequent judgments of your lordship's court, have been brought with the greatest of respect, a little cloudy about what exactly is the scope of those two tests also. my lord, in my respectful submission at least one judgment has mixed up the two tests as well, as i'll show to your lordships. so, my lord, coelho itself gives rise to several questions. i fully appreciate the fact that this may not be the right forum to tackle coelho in its entirety. but perhaps my attempt today can be to show your lordship that an appropriate opportunity, my lord, there are some creases which need to be ironed out in the coelho judgment. if you are taking 20 minutes, let's look at it. i'll try to quickly deal with it. if your lordship, will have a look at my note. do your lordships have my notes? so, if your lordship sees the index of my note, my lord, it is ii and my lord, i have tried to make it comprehensive with regard to what i want to say with regard to coelho. i just want to show your lordship, after that one or two paragraphs in coelho which are of particular significance. yes. my lord, in paragraph 1, my lord, i've just set out what your lordships have already read. in paragraph 2, i have dealt with the reference... my lord, paragraph 2. so, my lord, first is the reference in coelho, why was it referred. the judgment in i. r. coelho... para 2, right? yes, para 2, my lord it's at page 27, pagination, top right-hand side, looks at something like this. yes. just go to para 2... to para 2. so, my lord, we are in para 1. i follow my lord. we can follow it here. please scroll down to paragraph. yeah, but the judgment in i. r. coelho notice that there were apparent inconsistencies in the judgment in waman rao vs union of india in particular between the judgments of chief justice chandrachud and justice bhagavati. see paragraph 3 of i. r. coelho supra. accordingly, the five judges in i. r. coelho stated that the judgment in waman rao needs to be considered by a larger bench so that the apparent inconsistencies therein are reconcile and it is made clear, whether an act or regulation, which or a part of, which is, or has been found by this court to be violative of one or more of the fundamental rights confirmed by article 14, 19 and 31 can be included in the ninth schedule, or whether it is only a constitutional amendment, amending the ninth schedule, that damages or destroys the basic structure of the constitution that can be struck down. so, your lordship notes the question as formulated, it's slightly changed when the nine judges actually dealt with it. further, the five judges in coelho also noted that the decision in bhim singhji case will also have to be considered by the larger bench for the purpose of arriving at a conclusion aforementioned. my lord, just by way of a temporal context, your lordship is aware, my lord, waman rao, minerva mills were 1980, minerva mills july 1980, waman rao november 1980... interim order pronounced in the same day ninth may 1980? exactly, my lord. interim order pronounced on the same day, reasons given separately, but one before the other… but unusual of great academic interest for various reasons. 'magisterial dissent by justice bhagavati in minerva mills picked up in sanjeev coke ' as your lordship notes. waman rao, my lord, deals with the unamended article 31c, upholds it not because of kesavananda bharati but on independent reasoning, which is in parity with upholding article 31(a) on agrarian reforms. on the other hand, my lord, in minerva mills, an interesting point, that the sick industries act, which was challenged there, was actually an act which took effect prior to the amendment to 31c. but yet 31c was struck down, my lord, on the annual of 14, 19 and 21. i think that is what is referred to broadly also in this. now, my lord, the judgment in i. r. coelho...and i've put here, actually, what the question was, and the facts to allow us to actually understand what was decided - 'the matter was duly referred to a bench of nine judges. the judgment is reported in so and so... the challenge before this high court was that the gudalur janmam estate abolition and conversion into ryotwari acts 1969 insofar as it vested forest lands in the janmam estates in the state of tamil nadu, was struck down by this court in the balmadies plantations ltd. because this was not found to be a measure of agrarian reform protected by 31(a) of the constitution. section 2(c) of the west bengal land holding revenue act, '79 was struck down by the kolkata high court as being arbitrary and therefore unconstitutional, and the special leave petition filed against the judgment of the state of west bengal was dismissed by the constitution 34th amendment act. that janmam act, in its entirety, was inserted in the ninth schedule by the constitution 66th amendment act. the west bengal land holding revenue act in its entirety was inserted in the ninth schedule. these insertions were the subject matter of challenge before the five-judge bench.' so, my lord, a very troublesome aspect of the ninth schedule was that after a court had set aside a statute, despite the constitutional basis of it being set aside, not being altered by parliament, they could simply validate it, by putting it into the ninth schedule. that has been long the criticism of the ninth schedule. 'the contention heard before the constitution bench was that the statutes, inclusive of the portion thereof, which had been struck down, could not have been validly inserted into the ninth schedule. the judgment...' now, my lord, the question, your lordship, will immediately note a slightly different question, from the question referred - '...the fundamental question, as my lady, pointed out, but on and after 24th april 73, whether the basic structure document was propounded, it is permissible for parliament under article 31b to immunize legislation from fundamental rights by inserting them into the 9th schedule. and if so, what is the effect on the power of judicial review of the court.' so, the question frame, not against me, on the 31c point, is that it was squarely a 31(b) question which was framed. now, please see now, how it was answered. now, i'll take your lordships straight to the conclusions. longish judgment...150 odd paragraphs. in conclusion, we hold that a law that abrogates or abridges rights guaranteed by part iii of the constitution may violate the basic structure doctrine or it may not. so, not every part of part iii is a part of the basic structure. a classic example, what i've often puzzled about is 18 titles. it seems to be an odd inclusion in chapter iii. but it seems to be strange to say that it is an inalienable human right, et cetera. so, they've noticed that. they said - not every part of chapter iii is actually entrenched. 'if the former is the consequence of law, whether by amendment of any article of part iii or by an insertion in the ninth schedule, such law will have to be invalidated in the exercise of judicial review power of the court. the validity or invalidity would be tested on the principles laid down in this judgment the majority judgment in kesavananda bharati read with indira gandhi's case, requires the validity of each new constitutional amendment to be judged on its own merits. the actual effect and impact of the law on the rights guaranteed under part iii has to be taken into account for determining whether or not it destroys the basic structure. the impact test would determine the validity of the charge.' now the impact test is viewed, what's called, interchangeably, the rights test or the impact test. 'iii. all amendments made to the constitution after 24th april '73, the date of kesavananda bharati, by which the ninth schedule is amended by inclusion of various laws therein, shall have to be tested on the touchstone of basic and essential features of the constitution as reflected in article 21 read with 14, 19 and the principles underlying them. to put it differently, even though an act is put in the ninth schedule by a constitutional amendment, its provisions would be open to attack, on the ground that, they destroy or damage the basic structure of, if the fundamental rights or the rights taken away or abrogated pertain or pertain to the basic structure. justification for conferring protection, not blanket protection, on the laws included in the ninth schedule by constitutional amendment shall be a matter of constitutional adjudication. by examining the nature and extent of infraction of a fundamental right by a statute sought to be constitutionally protected and on the touchstone of basic structure doctrine as referred to in article 21 read with 14 and 19 by application of the rights test.' now my lord, here comes the second test. 'and the essence of right test taking a synoptic view of articles in part 3, as held in indira gandhi's case. applying the above test to the ninth schedule laws, if the infraction affects the basic structure, then such laws will not get protection of the ninth schedule. this is our answer to the question referred to us vide order 14999 in i. r. coelho and state of tamil nadu.' so far, it would be difficult to say that this is a 31c judgment, this is very much a 31b judgment, i fully appreciate that. my lord, v, 'if the validity of any ninth schedule law has... sorry, it has already been upheld by this court' i'm so sorry, small error. 'it would not be open to challenge such law again, on principles declared by this judgment.' that was the pernicious effect of 31b. 'however, if a law held to be violative of any rights in part 3 is subsequently incorporated in the ninth schedule after 24th april '73, such a violation infraction shall be open to challenge on the ground that, it destroys or damages the basic structure. as indicated in article 21, read with article 14, and 19 and the principles underlying thereunder, my lord, actions taken and transaction finalized, as a result of the impugned acts, shall not be open to challenge.' now my lords, some of the salient features are set out here. my lord, before i go to the salient features, your lordship knows enough of the judgment. just to take a view, i'll take your lordships to my submissions on this and come back. the salient features, i must confess to plagiarism. i have taken them from my learned friend mr. devrajan's note, which he had kindly shared with me. he had done such a masterly job of it. i saw no reason to alter it in any way. may i take your lordships, straight now to the conclusions that i have drawn in paragraph 9. i'll come back if necessary, to the salient features. but broadly speaking, what the judgment does, is that it broadens the defence that is given by fundamental rights. it is said, it is no longer on isolated pools. it should be viewed as the principal controlling influence over the amending power. that is the broad thrust of what this does. but there are certain observations with regard to 31c, i'll come to now. the conclusions i have drawn are these. my lord, the conclusions that can be drawn from the judgment in i. r. coelho are as stated below. 'when a law abrogates or abridges rights granted by part 3 of the constitution, it may or may not violate the basic structure doctrine. the test to be applied is either the rights test or the essence of rights test. the rights test is as under. first, the court must test whether there is a violation of part 3. and second, if such a violation is found, its impact must be examined in terms of its effect, and substance, to see whether it destroys the basic structure of the constitution. in the event it does, then i quote, "invalidation has to follow". the essence of right test is explained in m. nagarajan's case, within part 3, 14, 15, 19, 20, and 21', your lordship noticed that this was not recognized in the conclusion, but it is in the body of the judgment, '... are recognized as a part of the basic structure, the validity of 31a and 31c were not questioned, and accordingly expressed... sorry, expressly held to be valid. this is the interesting observation, despite the denial of article 14, and on the basis that these articles have indicia, which is not there in article 31b. now, some observations on the impact on the present case, and your lordship, will take all of this in the spirit that, i accept what your lordship say, and it may or may not be decided by your lordships. not applying the essence of rights test, not essence of rights test, slightly different from the rights test, my lord summarized to mean that, we must go behind the principles, with each of the fundamental rights. i had thought that, a reference to essence would be a narrowing down of the right, but actually it is a broadening of the right. what it says is that we must go by the principle of the right. so, we must read the constitution as a whole for that. so, article 14 should not be read, for example, in a formalistic manner. we must read it in a broad manner in accordance with the spirit of article 14. applying the essence of right test since '21, read with 14 and 19, the principles underlying them have been held to be a part of the basic structure. article 31c, insofar, as is inconsistent with, or abridges rights under article 14, destroys the basic structure even applying the rights test, the same result follows. accordingly, the consequence is that invalidation of 31c has to follow. now, this is controversial, i see that. but let me set out my thought process for your lordship. there was no challenge to 31c in i. r. coelho. the statement with regard to 31 a and 31c, and the fact that they differ from 31 b should be understood in that context. in the present case, the question of 31c squarely arises, and other things being equal, but what i mean is, if you exclude kesavananda, et cetera, and subject to what is stated below, it is open to this hon'ble court of nine judges to examine the validity of 31c. this is especially so as coelho has observed that 31c results in a denial of article 14. the determination of the validity of 31c in kesavananda bharati is however binding. 31c was upheld by a majority of seven judges, six judges and six judges as... sorry, six judges, chief justice ray, palekar dwivedi, mathew beg and justice chandrachud as he was then held that, it should be upheld because of the amending power of parliament was absolute and unlimited. justice khanna, even on the basis the limited power to amend upheld the validity of article 31c. in this regard see, justice bhagavati in minerva mills. he has done a masterful analysis of this aspect. the impact of the judgment of coelho is, however, to render 31c without any force. the validity of 31c, while binding, is a matter of precedent, is depleted of purpose. there's some follow up also my lord, which is there. follow up all concerns that test. but if your lordships are not going into it, my lord, it may not be very relevant. so, my lord, this is the issue with regard to coelho. my lord, with the greatest of respect my lord... thank you, mr. andhyarujina. grateful sir. yes, mr. devrajan? now, we are going to be arguing the 39(b) point, basically. with your lordship's kind permission. before i attempt to interpret 39(b), i would request your lordship to have a look at article 39. the state shall in particular direct its policy. my lord, our case is, that if it's a policy of the state, it can't be restricted to a few wards and municipal corporations, that's our first case. our first point is on the question of policy? that will be a ground to challenge the activity the act also no? the act is under challenge my lords. that is before the bench which will hear the challenge. i bow before your lordships, but when it comes to an interpretation, my lords, one point that your lordships have repeatedly been saying, that if we feel that it's an academic question, we will not decide it. the point i'm trying to make here is two-fold. one, before we go to question whether private property should be material resources of community or not, the question that we need to consider is, what is material resources? one, and two, in respect to the matters before your lordships, with their material resource, i fully bow to my lord, the chief justice said we are not entitled to the property. we are on, whether it's the resource of the community. again, the question here is not just resource of the community. is it a material resource of the community? i am emphasizing the words here, my lords, i want policy and i want material resource. before i come to the question whether private can be included or not, this question might kindly be considered. you must also bear in mind; material resources of the community are in the context of distribution. i bow before your lady. i bow before your ladyship's suggestions, because our case further when we go through, i take the liberty of taking your lordships through the act. only thus, chapter viii-a, because that might clarify quite a few points. is there a distribution of control? is there a distribution of material resources? now material resources once i can zero down and say that, material resource should be a cut resource which produces goods or services for the community. if it does not produce goods or services, it would not fall within the category of material resources. that is my humble submission for your lordships kind consideration. here, my lady, what is the situation? the situation is that a cess was levied on these landlords, and tenants for carrying out structural repairs. the state says, it is our duty to carry out structural repairs. when i say state my lord, i refer to the board. if they don't carry out structural repairs, they don't give me the wherewithal to carry out repairs. my rent is frozen at 1940 levels. the cost of all building materials, construction materials have shot up and i've not put in a position to carry out a test, would such buildings form a material resource, much less that of the community? this is a question which i would try to satisfy your lordships, that this is not a material resource, much less of the community. that's the first.... clause b, clause b has four aspects. the primary aspect is material resources of the community. what is it dealing with? it is dealing with the distribution of the material resources of the community. what facet of distribution is it dealing with? it is dealing with ownership... and control. and control, because are so distributed, qualifies ownership and control. correct. ownership and control of what? of the material resources... and for what purpose? distribution of what? distribution of the ownership and control of the material. material resource. now we are... now, what is the object to subserve the common good and the fact that the legislature, that the constitution uses the expression 'ownership' and 'control' is very significant. 'ownership' refers to the title or the vesting of the title. 'control' is much broader in its understanding because it's not confined to title. here my lords, i'm raising two issues for your lordships, kind consideration. the first, as i already indicated in my lord, when the constitution says that the state policy of the directives policy, now would it be only for the city of bombay, would it be only for the district of nasik, or should it be, that policy should be over the state? this is the primary question. that wouldn't worry us because the state can always make an under-inclusive classification. then you say that, look, the condition of the buildings in mumbai is so unique that you don't have to legislate, you don't have to regulate the entirety of the state. that the state can easily... that is not an issue at all... my lord, if it were a regulation, my lord, i would have bowed to your lordships' suggestions immediately, but here it's not a regulation, my lords. here it's not a regulation. you know, we are not so much today interpreting the provisions of the statute, as we are interpreting the expressions of clause b of article 39. i bow to what my lord the chief justice has said. but i request my lord the chief justice to kindly consider whether we could interpret this dehors the facts before us because this question has come to your lordships, on the basis of certain facts which were there. but when we are interpreting article 39(b), we don't interpret it in the context of that statute today before the bench of nine judges. i would request your lordships to kindly consider... there is a dichotomy between privately held property and publicly. for instance, will 39(b) cover only those lands which are what you call in maharashtra gairan lands, or the grazing lands, or would it also cover in certain cases private lands? only one interjection which... so that your lordship's discussion can also be suitably. my lords, resources psychologically because of mhada and rent act, we are considering land and building. the resources would mean several mines, minerals, airwaves, et cetera, my lords, several things. natural resources as well as man-made resources. yes, exactly. not just land or building. that also may be one of the focus of examination. my lord, i have no difficulty in the term, resources. i have difficulty in submitting to your lordships, that my building would be a 'material resource' because your lordships have time and again held, sorry... your contention... mr. devrajan, look, mhada act contains a declaration, that it is intended to give effect to the directive principle contained in 39(b). your contention, i mean, we are just trying to understand your argument. your argument is that, look, you could not have made that declaration because ...39(b) cannot, by any standards, extend to private property. i think that's your.... that was your submission. no, my lords. my submission is slightly wider than that. what your lordship says is one part of what i'm submitting. my second part of it is - before you make such a declaration... because your lordship and kesavananda said, "this is justiciable.
" 'before you make a declaration...'? 'before you make a declaration, you must come to the conclusion that it's a material resource.' obviously... i'm on that. i am trying to make a submission... according to this, this can't be a .... this can't be material resource at all. 'it can't be a material resources. old dilapidated buildings cannot be material resource of the community.' this is my submission. you are questioning the declaration itself. in a way, my lady. in a way, i'm trying to interpret 39(b) to say that "before 39(b) can apply and the subsequent takings can follow...
" yes, what i interpret it, my ladyship said, i need to go through the act to interpret the rest of 39(b), but i'm not going there. but why can't be interpreted like this that any building... we are not dealing with a building. buildings which are in the occupation... old dilapidated buildings in say, like the island city, which are in the occupation of a large mass of occupiers and tenants - they constitute as part of the material resources as a community, because ultimately it's a source of habitation and abode for such a large group of citizens. my lord, the chief justice, i bow to what your lordship said, but my lords have time and again said - "make the distinction between a resource per se and material resources.
" this is where i would try to convince, your lordships that, yes, this is a resource. but is it a material resource... just one... to add to one, which the chief justice, has asked you - the material resources of the community, when you look at that expression, are we not also looking at the community of inhabitants in a dilapidated building? please, my lord. because if you look at their needs, a building is crumbling down. the building is no safer. so, community who are occupying that building, it is a material resource and a vital material resource for them. again, my lord, i could not make my point clear. that it is a resource...that it is a resource, the petitioners don't dispute. the question is - "is it a material resource?
" because your lordships have said - "for a resource to be a material resource, it should provide goods and services for the community, which is my building doing so?
" it provides a service. what is more fundamental than the right to a housing? it provides a place of abode for such a large segment of the community. take, a building which has 70 occupiers or 40 occupiers. it's a community as brother hrishikesh roy says, that it's a community of occupiers. the community will have to  for this community. absolutely. please, my lords. mr. devrajan, have you got your... have you made some written submissions? i have made a note, my lords. but that note, i have not given to your lordships because quite a bit of it, your lordships have already shot down. so, i don't want to give it, because those points i can't raise now. your lordships have already told us that we can't go into that. so, i don't want to give that to your lordships. so, what is your formulation? my formulations are like this, my lord. your submissions on article 39(b)... yes. i would start my lords, by saying, if your lordships permit me, i would like to read certain passages from krishna iyer's judgment first. justice krishna iyer's judgment in that in the ranganatha reddy case? in the ranganatha reddy case. because that should give us a... that should give us a background... where is ranganatha reddy? where is this? it's volume number 5. page 1727 pdf. as my learned friend rightly said, let me just put the broad proposition before your lordships, before i take your lordships through ranganatha reddy. yeah. my lords, the way that part 4 has been drafted or prepared, part 4 is in the nature of instructions to be given to the state. in that context, we'd have to read 39(b) also. i do not want to read 39(b) dehors the context. first part. the second part is my lords, without taking tuto, when i read 39(b) also, i can't interpolate or leave off certain parts of 39(b). that's the interpretation. when i come to interpreting 39(b), my proposition is, i read 39(b) as it is, without adding anything into it, or without removing anything from it, because this is something which is going to affect the citizen's right to a non-justiciable provision. so, therefore, these two concepts my lords, kindly consider as being the basis of my further submissions, on this point. but before i take your lordships there, i thought that if i could highlight to your lordships, the background in which justice krishna iyer made the statement and what was the thought process of my lord justice krishna iyer when he made this statement, it might help me to explain to your lordships a little better what i'm trying to project. so, my lords may kindly go down to, before i take your lordships to justice krishna iyer's judgment, i won't take you long, because that's already been cited... some passages have already been cited from the majority judgment. justice untwalia's judgment has already been placed. you go to justice krishna iyer, that passage which i told you, don't waste... i'm sorry, my lords, i'm not very conversant with this. hard copies, i would have easily managed. the point i'm trying to say my lords, justice... justice krishna's judgment? my lords may please see para 81, of justice krishna iyer... starts at 40. yeah. okay. you can give us the page number. yeah. my lord, may please. justice krishna iyer's judgment is at page 1750, my lord, of the... 1750. 1750. volume v. the relevant portion of ranganatha reddy, my lords. that's para 81 at page 17... 1750, para 40. your lordship may permit me to read from para 40. i know it's a little longer, but i'll try to cut short and put whatever i think would be required by us. better read para 40 first. yes, please my lords. before that the preface. yes, my lords. "we go wholly with our learned brother untwalia.
then why a separate afterword? " he's asked this question. because, to put it simplistically... sorry, my lords. yes. please, my lords. because, to put it simplistically, a legislation for the nationalization of contract carriages by the karnataka state, where provision has been made for fair compensation, under present circumstances, has still been struck down by high court on the surprising grounds of absence of public purpose, illusions of compensation, state takeover being beyond the ambit of article 39(b) and the like, and to express ourselves emphatically in reversal, on the obvious, yet basic, issue we item wise below, which is necessary to obviate constitutional derangement again. the public sector in our constitution system, is so strategic a tool in the national plan, for transformation from stark poverty to social justice. my lords, may permit me to pause here for a moment. the background which, my lords he seems to have, is nationalization. his whole focus was, when i nationalize, i can take private property and nationalize it. that seems to be the focus. it is in this context, that phrase has been used there. this is my humble submission, my lords, i can't leave out what justice krishna has said, dehors what was in his mind. so, my lords may permit me to go further. my lords may please see para 41. if the state to subserve the objects of governmental or other like agencies compulsorily takes movable property or realty of private citizens, the like of which are readily available in the open market, does the law authorizing such violating limitation of public purpose imposed by article 31(2) of the constitution. today my lords, i can't go further on because, i don't have article 31(2) on my statute today. but yet, the underlying principle seems to be 'nationalization' as i pointed out earlier. throughout, even in this paragraph, my lord, the lordship is concerned with 'nationalization'. it is in that context again i re-emphasize, my lord. it is in that context that, that phrase finds place in justice krishna iyer’s judgment. not that 39(b), not that in 39(b), 'private property' would be included. no. he says "you take private property for nationalization.
" there, in that context it says, distribution of such property would be for the common good because i'm giving it to the public at large. i'm taking from one person, giving it to the public at large. it is not a case where a private property would be taken and given to another private person. that is not what he had in mind. my lord, justice krishna iyer had nationalization only in mind when he made this submission. this is my humble submission for your lordship's kind consideration. i'll take my lordships still further, where my lord deals with distribution also. my lord says "distribute it.
" there also, my lord says that is the basis of 39(b), distribution for the common good again means nationalize and give it to the people. don't keep it with you. give it to the people. throughout, give it to the people. that is his whole focus. with this background in mind, my lords, i may kindly be permitted to now read the provisions of article 39. but before i go to 39, a few other articles which might throw 'some light on the interpretational process. mr. devrajan? yes, sir. perhaps you will also take us on the objective of the act, because, after all, we'll have to consider, together with what you are trying to canvass before us, that it is only in the context of nationalization, because the act obviously doesn't think of nationalization, but it talks about giving it back to community or let us say, co-operative society. so therefore, you'll have to take us through the objective of the act as well. this nationalization act or power act? no. the 'mhada' act. please. my lords. i was avoiding it my lords, because in- between, in between, it came from your lordships, that your lordships would prefer to deal with this or not? don't get derailed. don't get derailed. sorry. we'll have to understand the context of the act. please, my lords. i will. with your lordships' kind permission, i'll take your lordships through the provisions of the statute also, but what is its purpose, i may tell your lordships in brief. the purpose of chapter viii-a of the act is preservation of "". i'll set out those provisions because i've got a note which i'll hand over. each section i have analysed. i'll put it at . before that my lords may kindly permit me to just clear this small aspect which was there in my mind, which i thought i would share with your lordships, namely about material resources. i don't. want to go into material resources per se, i already made a submission to your lordships, that i have to read 39 in the context in which it was placed in the statute book. and the context is what? the context is, it's a directive principle to the state. to do what? 37 very clearly says, it shall be the duty of the state to apply these principles in making these laws. and now, in that context, when i come to 39(b), my lords have 39(b), for a moment, please. thank you. thank you. would your lordships have 39(b) for a moment, please? yes. my lords, my submission here is, if the term 'material resources of the community' is to include private property. if it is to include private property, then some words have to be added, or some words have to be deleted, namely, here my lords, the ownership and control of private material resources of the community are so distributed. 'private' has to be added there or what they should remove is, material resources are so distributed, "of the community" has to be removed. if it is removed, then this material resource will apply to all resources, private and public. we are asking ourselves to read this article, which has got drastic consequences of shutting out my constitutional rights under articles 14 and 19 in a manner which is not present in that article. the term 'community', it will not be included? 'community' is not defined. but i take it that 'community means the entire... whoever is, what should i say... affected by it... or a particular, like we say, the tamilian committee, the andhra community... does it not include private also. community means it's a generic term basically. correct. but when i talk of the resources, i'm now talking of the resources also. and here my lords... sorry, my lord is saying something. of the community. are you trying to say that resources of the community... material resources of the community does not encompass private resources? this is what i am trying to submit my lady. for the reason that, if it were so, it would read private material resources of the community also. because, as your lordship said, every individual is a member of the community. there's no doubt about it. it talks about resources of the community only? this point i'm trying to say, trying to canvass for your lordships' kind consideration is, if it was intended to cover private resources, this 39(b) could have specified it, rather than leave it for an interpretation to somebody who could misinterpret it or interpret it in a different way. it's just the addition of a single word, or deletion of certain words. here, my lords, i will take your lordships through one judgment, which i could lay my hands on, where the term, 'material resources' has been considered. there, their lordships have said... where is that...? ...relevant portion 2314... my lords, in that judgment compilation... what was that, volume 5? volume 5. if my lords could have page 2314 for a moment my lords? if i may trouble my lordships to have a look at that judgment, please. yes. my lords, in sanjeev coke, though it's against me on other aspects, my lords, one very important factor was considered. but in justice krishna iyer's judgment, just read para 80 and 81... please. justice krishna links it with the whole concept of redistributions. correct. and says the focus of article 39(b) is on redistribution. then, whether that material resource is public or private should not make any difference. that's the logic of his judgment. essentially, my lord, that is nationalization concept. if i read this again in the... para 80 and 81 you can read. 1771. my lords, 1771. 17...what? 1770, 1771. yeah. please my lords. my lords, reading para 81, my lords. my lords, could i read para 81, please? sorry? could i read para 81 onwards, my lords? you can actually read para 80 as well. please, my lords. "this takes us to the non-negotiable minimum of nexus between the purpose of the acquisition and article 39(b).
article 39(c) was feebly mentioned but article 39(b) was forcefully pressed by the appellant.
better read article 39(b) before discussing its full import.
certain principles of policy to be followed by the state.
the state shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good.
" the key word is 'distribute' and the genius of the article, if we, may say so, cannot but be given fully play as it fulfils the basic purpose of restructuring the economic order. each word in this article has a strategic role and the whole article is a social mission. it embraces the entire material resources of the community. its task is to distribute such resources. its goal is so to undertake distribution as best to subserve the common good. it reorganizes, by such distribution, the ownership and control. 'resources' is a sweeping expression and covers not only cash resources but even ability to borrow credit resources. it's meaning given in black's so and so, my lords, go through it. now, just take your lordships, next. and materials of the community, in the context of reordering the national economy, embraces all the national wealth. my lordships, justice krishna iyer would like to even take away my salary or my fees and distribute. i'm not saying anything about anybody else, but at least for myself, i can say. if what justice krishna iyer raised here is implemented, whatever fees i earned also can be taken away and distributed. they do that, in tax. they did it in the past, my lords. 97% was a tax at one time. they did it in the past, my lords. they say you earn rs. 3000, if you earn rs. 3000, if your da goes up by rs. 1800, we'll reduce your salary and keep it 3000. they did it in the past, my lords. so, all the time trying to suggest my lords, again, reading this para also, it takes me back to the same principle. the same principle he wants to usher in a socialistic pattern of society. one of the aims of that is, with regard to concentration of wealth in the hands of a few. so in that context, nationalization was one of the vehicles, to see that such a thing did not happen in society. correct. my lady... concentration of wealth. my lady, taking what fell from my ladyship's, a little further, would taking away from one person, fall within that category? would taking away a private person's property fall within that category? it is a question i am asking myself, my lord. i am not taking my lordships through para 82, because he categorically deals with nationalization and says it has a nexus with distribution. i've no issue. i can't... i'm not going into that. now, since my lords would like me to take your lordships through the act in question, where protection of 31c is sought by the state, and which we feel they cannot have, i will broadly tell your lordships, what that chapter is. broadly, i'll tell your lordships. just read para 81 also? sorry, para 81. please, my lords. my lord has got it? it's at page 1771 of the compilation, my lords. 'resources is a sweeping expression and covers not only cash resources, but even ability to borrow, and material resources of community, in the context of reordering the national economy, embraces all the national wealth, not merely natural resources, all the private and public resources of meeting material needs, not merely public possessions. everything of a value or use in the material world, is 'material resource' and the individual being a member of the community, his resources are part of those of the community.' any land in excess of the ceiling that was taken away, it vested with the state for the purpose of redistribution. yes. that is private land. true. my lady, but taken away under what provision of the act? under what provisions? and in respect of what? land reforms act. correct. land reforms act, my lady, we have specific provision article 31a, which deals with estates. there they don't rely on 39(b) at all. they don't rely on 39(b) at all. what falls from your ladyship, yes, i did think about it, but then they don't. they don't say, i pass an act and seek protection, elsewhere. 39(a) itself says, if it's an estate, yes, i can take it away. because, the whole concept of 39(a) is zamindar system... to abolish zamindar system. large tracts of land, they wanted to give it to the tiller. land to the tiller was a concept those days. today they are saying land to the tenant. even if the, even if the landlord has got a single building, even if he's surviving with a meagre rent, you take it away from him. today, my lady, let me... what justice krishna iyer has said about material resources, a subsequent bench has clarified what material resources. the constitution bench in sanjeev coke, that judgment is against me in so far as 31c is concerned my lord. sanjeev coke now? yes, sanjeev coke manufacturing company, (1983) 1 scc 147. my lord, it's at page 2294 of this case law compilation. it starts from there. the relevant portion is para 19 at 2314 my lords. 23... sorry. my lord, the judgement... 2313 i think. sorry, my lord? 19 is 2313. my lord, its para 19, but the relevant portion is on the next page. 2313 is where it starts. 2314 is the relevant portion. my lords may permit me to read it. the expression material.... i'm sorry. where you are reading? my lords, after the starting of the page, the lordships are dealing with state of karnataka vs ranganatha reddy, on the top, and about say eight lines below, my lord. it is eight lines below. is it part of paragraph 19? yes, my lord. paragraph 19, part of paragraph 19. unfortunately, i don't see the placitums here, which were there in the past. read from the third line. read from the third line. shri sen urged.... shri sen urged, that is the word 'distribute' was given its proper emphasis, it would inevitably follow that material resources must belong to the community as a whole. that is to say, to the state or the public before they could be distributed as best to subserve the common good. since these material resources which belong to the state only could be distributed by the state, shri sen argued that material resources had first to be acquired by the state before they could be distributed. a law providing for acquisition was not a law for distribution. now, this is important my lords where they say, we are unable to appreciate the appreciate the submission of shri sen. the expression material resources of the community. now they have defined this my lords. of the community, means all things which are capable of producing wealth for the community. not that all things in which the community has an interest. no. they say that must produce wealth for the community. then it will be a material resource of the community. here, so this is the test, my lords. is this a material resource or not? the test is, would that resource produce wealth for the community? not for myself. this is the test that your lordships have laid down. and then they say there's no warrant for interpreting the expressions, in so near a fashion as suggested by shri sen. i'm not going further my lords. for my limited purpose my lords, material resource means it must produce wealth for the community. like the buses did. in a nationalized program those buses did. whether, they actually earned or not is a different matter. but that was the intention. 39(b), refers to material resources of the community. it does not refer only to resources owned by the community as a whole, but it also refers to resources owned by individual members of the community. that's what they say at page 2315. please, my lords. now, this is the point that i am trying to say. "resources of the community do not mean public resources only, but include private resources as well.
" the point that i'm just emphasizing a little more, yes, private resources, but for what purpose? producing goods and services for the community. if i have a piece of land which is just lying that, you take it and produce goods and services for the community. there's no difficulty in 39(b) applying there. the crucial word, according to me, is that, this is emphasized by the interpretation of 39(b). since it would be necessary for us to see what this chapter viii-a is about, if my lords may permit me to just place it, my lords. give me the act. to broadly indicate... i'm sorry my lords. i had circulated one note which reads, 'history regarding repairs'. could i take your lordships through that? yes, certainly. where is that? my instructions are, it was mailed to your lordships this morning. yes. just upload it for us. actually, we should go to the act. more than the note, we'll look at your note, but let's look at the provisions of the act. please, my lords. ...of chapter viii-a. and, because they will give us a flavour of whether these provisions have a nexus of the distribution of the resources of the community for the common good. please, my lords, i would do that. my lords, the reason why i suggested this is, in this note, if your lordships may kindly go to... a little down, i have set out the salient provisions of the act, my lords... at 12, my lords. at item 12. mr. devrajan is the only counsel now, who has to argue on this side? my lord, small request. my learned friend, might add a few things to what i have said. few things he might like to add. and my learned friend, zal also might like to add a few things. just a few things, my lord. so, mr. devrajan, you can wrap up by 3:30, about 50 minutes. i'll try to wrap up as fast as possible, my lords. by 04:00 we'll complete this side. tomorrow we'll start with the other side. my lords may kindly, give me a leeway of about 10-15 minutes, given my speed is not that good. no problem. but by 03:00, that's why instead of 03:15 i... i would try, my lord. i will definitely try to obey your lordships directions. if you are done by 04:00, then, we'll call upon the other side tomorrow. okay. my lords, if your lordships, just to shorten the things, in this note, serial number 12. in this note, serial number 12, i've set out a salient factors of chapter viii a. but, i need to take your lordships through the various clauses also, which i would do subsequently. but now, let me take your lordship to chapter viii-a, because this would directly answer the question that has been posed to me. my case is that chapter viii-a, in its pith and substance, is for preservation of housing stock. these old buildings, how do i preserve them? not just preserve them, but actually reconstruct them as well. that's why i will take your lordships through the section 103b. it will become very clear, my lords. they use the word 'better preservation' or 'reconstruction'. the emphasis is first on 'better preservation.' my lords may with permit me to just take your lordships briefly through this note. then, i'll take your lordships through the section. which is that chapter? chapter viii-a. what is the page, pdf page? chapter viii is 4033 of the main statute... 4033? my lord, we put the gazetted copy today, my lords. we got chapter vii-a now. at 4033, we go to chapter viii-a. vii-a is not in question here, right? actually, my lords, there was no vii-a at all. that's a typo error. that was a typo my lords. absolute typo, my lord. so, 103a is in the chapter viii? viii-a, my lords. my lords may kindly see. today's concentration is on viii-a. chapter viii-a is the... what's the pdf page? we're just trying to... 4033 is viii-a. so 103a is in chapter viii-a? we'll start from there, my lord. because the title says "chapter vii-a.
" that's why i asked it. it's a typographical error. typographical. my lord, today we uploaded a gazetted copy of the act, my lords. in that, your lordships will find it page 237, chapter viii-a. i'm told it's a typo error. my learned friend tells me it is... it is a typo error. yes. it is viii-a. viii-a, actually. 4033, in which volume it is? volume iv. volume iv. my lords. could i trouble you to look at the gazetted copy because there might be certain... no no, it will be the same. that... only change is that chapter vii-a. as i said, i've not cross-verified, so i requested you.. you read the gazetted copy. if there's some change, we will know. all right. my lords, please see section 103a first. section 103a... section 103a states, that the chapter will apply to all buildings constructed prior to 1st september 1940. the proviso to that says, two things. one, it says that- the building should be predominantly residential. that is, more than 50% of the occupants must use it for residential purposes. that's the first part, my lord. the second point is, it should be a building belonging to category a. that is to say, other buildings are not part of chapter viii-a. defined in section 84? chapter viii-a is defined in, chapter viii, under the heading, for... category a is in section 84 at page 4023? correct. of chapter viii. briefly put, my lords, the categorization was done like this. buildings constructed prior to 1st september, 1940 are category a, buildings constructed from 1st september '80 till 31st december 1950 are category b and building's constructed from 1st january 1951, till the enactment of the cess act, there used to be a cess act before my lords, called the bombay buildings repair and reconstruction board act 1968, till then, my lord, all those buildings were categorized as category c, and cess was being levied depending upon the category of the building. that's, in short, my lords. here my lords may please see the first proviso to section 103a. provided that nothing in this chapter shall apply to any cessed building belonging to category a, if on the commencement of the mhada, second amendment act, 1986, out of the total number of occupants of such building, 50% or more occupiers are using the tenements or premises in that position for 'commercial' or 'non residential'. in other words, my lord, even though cess could be levied on a category a building, these buildings, where it's predominantly commercial, would not fall within the provisions of chapter viii-a. then we come to the explanation, my lords. today for our present purpose, my lord, explanation is not that relevant. what is relevant is 103b. 103b says, notwithstanding anything contained in chapter viii or any other law, a co-operative society formed or proposed to be formed, by, under the provisions of co-operative societies act, but not less than 70%, i would stop here for a... why i'm saying this 70%, my lords, is when i deal with 39(b) and the policy, when i deal with a policy in 39(b), the policy of the state and 39(b), what is the co-relation between this act and the policy? if there is a policy, it should apply to everyone. now, this act is doing two things. it's not dealing with all pre-1940 buildings. that means to say, it's not dealing with all dilapidated or old buildings, which they consider to be dilapidated. this is only dealing with certain old buildings, whatever being their condition. that's the first part. the second point, as you said, is the trigger is 70% people wanting it. and what did they want? and why do they want it? they want it for one purpose. they say... my lords may please see. they make an application, they make a written application requesting the board to move the state government to acquire the land. for what purpose? this is important, my lords. so, go just a few so and so. four lines below that section my lords. in the interest of its better preservation, my lords, have got that? in its better preservation or reconstruction, of a new building in lieu of the old one, and intimate their willingness to pay the amount of such acquisition as may be determined under the provisions of chapter, and to carry out the necessary structural or other repairs, or wherever necessary. my lords, may please see, the reconstruction is 'wherever necessary' to reconstruct a new building. i ask myself this question, is this not a provision which deals with preservation of housing stock. if it is a preservation housing stock, how are they referring it to 39(b)? because, one of the tests that your lordships have time and again said, we will see whether there's a nexus between 39(b) and the enactment. here i ask myself this question. it has a nexus with distribution. because what happens is that instead in place of the ownership of the erstwhile owner, the property upon acquisition, vests in a co-operative society and that co-operative society represents the interests of all the occupiers. so, as opposed to the property being concentrated in the hand of the owner, as a result of this acquisition, title is transferred to a co-operative society, provided 70% of the occupiers want to come together and form the society and express a willingness to pay the amount of the compensation for acquisition. if what your lordships said was the act.. the idea is for the better preservation of the building or if repairs are required, repairs, or where reconstruction is required, reconstruction. the small aspect which i'd request your lordships to consider is, is there a transfer of ownership at all? is there a transfer of control at all? section 103c will explain this. section 103c will explain the concept of what am i giving a co-operative society? am i transferring ownership to him? am i giving control to him? 103c will explain. now just see, before 103c, sub-section 2 of 103, 103a, this is 103a no? b. on receipt of the application under sub-section (c), under sub section 1, the board shall, after due verification and scrutiny, approve the proposal, if it considers that it is in the interest of the better preservation of the building or to be necessary for reconstruction of a new building, and shall direct the co-operative society, whether registered or proposed, to deposit with the board within a period specified by it on their behalf, 30% of the approximate amount that would be required to be paid to the owner, if the land is acquired and give intimation that the... security has to be put up front. in short, that's the second part of our submission. in short, my lord, this act says, you pay the entire money of acquisition also, because 103b itself says so. you have to say that i will not only pay the cost of acquisition, but i'll also take care of the cost of repairs and reconstruction if any. if the entire money is to be paid by a private individual, and the state does not have to shell out a single paise from its coffer, would this be a concept of public purpose? well, 39(b) has to be for public purpose, because every action of the state has to be in furtherance of public purpose. this is what your lordships have said time and again. the public purpose really, is the better preservation of dilapidated buildings. yes. the reconstruction where reconstruction is necessary, because reconstruction is in order to obviate a danger of collapse and a loss of lives. saving human lives. and though the state does not pay, the state carries out the entire acquisition. but, since it's in the interest of the co-operative society, the amount has to be deposited by the co-operative society with the board. they have to pay the entire cost. they have to pay the entire cost. they have to pay the entire cost. and way back, my lords, not today, in kasturi lal's case, long, long ago... see mr. devrajan, we are not looking at the constitutional validity of the statutory provisions per se. no, we are not. we are looking at the... ...article 39. we're looking at the nexus. my lord, i am also making submissions vis-a-vis 39(b), because to me 39(b) has to be for a public purpose. please my lords. it has to be for a public purpose, and it is in public interest that 39(b) has been inserted. sans that 39(b) would have no sanctity, my lords. a directive principle to a state, has to have a public interest and a public purpose, my lords. 39(b) can't be read dehors these things. this is my submission. my voice is a little loud, but i don't mean any disrespect to the bench. i don't mean disrespect, my lords. very frequent visitor to the supreme court. i was practicing here. i was practicing here till i reached a stage where i could not walk my lords. even today i'm standing with great difficulty. we are sorry to hear that. i've got a hip-bone replaced, my lords. i could not walk. i could not stand the winter. so, i had to migrate back to bombay, from where i started my life. but decibels here are astounding. that's what i was going to... i'm sorry, my lords? decibels here are astounding, of some of your colleagues in the bar. specially on miscellaneous days, my lord. even if some lawyers are appearing virtually, and they are on a mute mode, we can hear them. sir, i could say the same about you also. i've been hearing you frequently sir. sorry, no offence meant. if i may continue. so, this act, we are not... again, i'm saying, i'm on the question of control. we are not challenging... checking the validity of this act, only trying to explain what are its content. and we are going to see whether 39(b) can at all apply. we are not going into the validity of the act, because i got other challenges to challenge this provision. i'm not on that. i am saying, concept of 'distribution of control', who has got the control? if i see 103c, the control is with the board, not with the society. if that society is given, it has to use it after reconstruction or repair, for the same purpose for which it was using before. so, where is the distribution? where did you transfer the control? secondly, my lords, if by chance one of the members sells, disposes it off, immediately my lord, the transaction is void, and the board will have a right to take back the property. where is the transfer of ownership? these are the questions which are falling from the provisions of this act, my lords. so, when i test this act, either on the basis that there should be a transfer of ownership or control, i don't find a transfer of ownership or control. why? ownership can control this transfer to the co-operative society. my lords, one of the incidents of transfer of ownership would be that i have the absolute right to the property. i don't have. i mean, to the co-operative society? i don't have a right my lord, because they say, the moment i gift it, my lords i'll read section 103c, then your lordships would see, how drastic that provision is. if that occupant gifts it, that gift is void. the property can be resumed. if the society uses this property other than what it was using before it was acquired, again they would resume. where is the transfer ownership then? if at every stage, whatever i do, you are going to have it, you have the absolute control over it. after the land is transferred to the co-operative society. even then, my lord. that is what i'm trying. and sub-section 7 of 103b says, subject to the provisions of sub-section 6, the authority shall convey the land acquired under this section to the co-operative society of the occupiers thereof... exactly. ...with its rights, title and interest therein, and execute without undue delay and necessary documents. therefore, title is transferred to the co-operative society. yes. there they say i will transfer the title. but now let me see what 103c says. let's see what 103c says. the transfer of title is subject to the conditions contained in 103c. 103c is the starting point. it says, after the land is transferred to a co-operative society... my lords, please kindly allow me to place this a little more vociferously. he says after the land is transferred to the co-operative society, under sub-section 7 of section 103b, which, my lord, the chief justice just now mentioned, what happens, the society shall use the same for the purpose for which it was used before the acquisition. so, ? no, not  usage. the idea is that if it was for... my lord, if i am the owner...commercial your lordship. ...converted into five-star hotel, the idea is to protect the occupier. no, see, no. they are not even protecting occupier. that's the unfortunate part of it. if they protect the occupier, my decibel levels would have been very, very low. they're not. they are saying that, go further, my lord, see. 'and if... that no member or tenant of the co-operative society shall transfer his interest in any tenement by sale, gifts, exchange, leave or license, assignment'. what is this? i don't have any of the incidents of ownership. i can't even gift it and yet there is a transfer of ownership to me. if this is the law, my lord, then i have to bow my head. i have nothing else to say on this. ho gaya. we'll take him to that. we all wish you a very happy birthday. i said that the court is very kind. if you want to sit and argue... the learned solicitor was suggesting to me that i should sit... at any point of time, if you want to sit and argue, please feel free. that's what. the court is always kind. my lord, it will make me feel sicker than i really am. i walk with a walking stick. today, i said, no, i am not going to carry the walking stick. let me walk without a stick. you should not do that. and that's how. because i have three people to hold my hand. why should i need a walking stick for that? no, sorry. jokes apart, my lord. come back again. my lords, i'll come back again. so, my lords, 103c. 103c sub-section 2, is a little... it says save as otherwise expressively provided in this chapter and notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force. you cannot do this. but see the embargo. the embargo in 103c(2) and then sub-3. if a co-operative society contravenes the provisions of sub-section(1). out. it will go back. but mr. devrajan, see 103 itself says that it will be used for the same purpose for which it was used prior to this particular step. so, therefore, so far as the occupants are concerned, their occupancy right in that building whichever way it comes up thereafter, is protected. so, it is to protect the right of residents. could i make a small submission here, my lords? these are all people are protected by the rent control legislation. nobody can touch them or send them out except by filing a suit in the rent court. all, most of them have been living and as my learned, as my learned friend pointed out, there are people who are claiming tenancy rights in the state, in the city of bombay, and are practicing here. i don't want to take anybody's name. they are paying peanuts for the huge premises that they are staying. so, therefore, my only submission here is, their occupancy rights are sufficiently protected by the provisions of the rent control act. , you know eviction, ejectment, etc. to just swiftly respond to what your lordship says. my lord, i'm saying it extempore. sorry. with your lordship's kind permission, can i take a sip of water, please? obliged, my lords. what is the next provision you want us to see, mr. devrajan? my lord, i just want to point out one more thing. for a long time it was in my mind, that, what's wrong, if the landlord is unable to maintain the premises, then what's wrong in getting the tenants to do it? to this, my lords, i found two problems to that question. one is, there was a provision under the old rent act, and probably even in this act, that if the landlord is not... because earlier... your lordships would be aware... earlier the landlord could increase the rent after carrying out repairs. even if he doesn't have money, he could borrow money and carry out repairs, and the tenant would repay that amount in pieces. then they came out with an amendment, saying that if the landlord is unable to do it, you carry out the repairs, and then you deduct it from the rent that you have to pay to him. all this not having worked, in 1968, they come out with an act called, 'the repairs board act'. 'the bombay repairs and reconstruction board act, 1968, where they said, this board will carry out the structural repairs, you pay a cess. a tax is levied for carrying out those repairs. even that they did not do. and today, in '86, they come out and say, these buildings were not being looked after by you. they forget that they have taken the responsibility of carrying out the repair. they forget that they are taking money from the people for carrying out the repairs. if they have not carried out the repairs, today, they say in this act, if your lordships would see, this act... they seek to now... we might have committed a default. we might have closed your rents at 1940 levels. we may not have made it possible for you to carry out repairs, yet, the buildings have gone bad, so we will take the property from you. now, whether at all 39(b) envisages such a situation, is a question, which i request your lordship to kindly consider. i'm a tenant myself, my lords, but still i'm fighting for a landlord's just demand. that please don't deprive me of the property that my forefathers have brought into. and my lordships would be aware that when the cess act came, there was a challenge done, and a report was recorded as to what is the status. this particular thing is for seven, only seven and only seven wards in the bombay sector. they're all old buildings, no doubt. but what is the remedy? is it taking it away? why not create conditions to make them carry on the repairs? and if they don't, then you take it away. this is all i say. you do whatever you want, but please make it possible for them. you don't say, that "i will take it, i will carry out the repairs, you pay me the cess.
" and at the end of the day, you say that "i could not do it, so you give me the building to the tenants.
" so, tenants are given opportunity. they don't do it. both takes that they will carry out repairs. they charge a cess from the tenant, as well as from me. and at the end of the day, the building is in a bad condition. who is responsible for that, i asked myself this question. rents... it is now recorded my lords, that cost of building materials have gone up substantially since 1940, astronomically. my rent is fixed. if anything in the world has remained stagnant and steady, it is the rent of these landlords. this is the fact. that's an argument for the rent act, my lords, i'm not on that. but i am on, whether at all 39(b) envisaged this? if 39(b) is supposed to do equitable distribution, where is the equity in this, my lord? this is the question i'm asking myself. my lords, i would stretch, my time is coming to an end. i have lost more to say. but, i'll request my learned friend to continue. my lords, can i be thankful to your lordships for your kindness? thank you, mr. devrajan. yes, mr. parekh. i'll attempt to answer the questions that have come from the bench. and first, my lord, let me answer on the interpretation of article 39(b). and, my lord, the moment we consider, the place in which this article appears, the interpretation is quite evident, and in fact, the ranganatha reddy judgment itself explains why, they specifically said that we are not endorsing what justice krishna has said. and let me just indicate why. 29(b) is one of the duties of the states. it's not one of the powers. and that's one of the answer to my lord's question. does 29(b), if my lords interpret it, article 29(b)... article? article 39(b). my lords interprets it narrowly, does it impact the power of the state to acquire, say, the coal mines or land or other properties? now ranganatha reddy itself answers and therefore, let me just put it in this manner. there are three different sets of provisions in the constitution. first is article 245 onwards which are the legislative power of the state, which include the power to acquire land. and as ranganatha reddy says that, seen with the concept of eminent domain, power to acquire land, et cetera, is all covered in the legislative power of the state. so therefore, whether 39(b) exists or not in the constitution, the power to acquire land, give it away, et cetera is all part of 245 onwards, the legislative powers of the government, the union and the state. now, what are the principles that they are to be followed? again, ranganatha reddy records that it must be a public purpose. suppose in that case, it was transport permits, transport permits were acquired, fair compensation was given, the court said certainly the state has the power to acquire transport permit. the only test is compensation, public purpose. if these two tests are met, we approve that. there is no difficulty with the act. we don't have to touch 31c. that is valid as it is. 39(b), (c) are therefore irrelevant. and that's what the majority says in ranganatha reddy. now, therefore, we now come to the two parts, namely part 3 and part 4. what are these parts and how do you interpret, and what is the principle that my lords will consider, while interpreting these provisions? article 3 is a fetter on the power of the state. my lords are, of course, familiar, i'm not going to expound on that. part 4 is a duty of the state, and therefore 37 onwards starts with what are your duties. first, it defines the state. who is the state? what are their powers? what are the duties? now, once, my lords considers holistically the provisions of part 4, it would be evident that part 4, 39(b) is a duty of the state to use material resources of the community for the benefit, let me just read that, to subserve the common good. now, seen as a duty, the only meaning, my humble submission is, that you can ascribe to 39(b), is that when there is ownership and control of material resources of the community, community can be state, a body under the state, like the mhada, the panchayat and various other bodies. and those panchayat et cetera, are also provided herein. you have a duty to use the goods or material resources of the community to subserve the common good. it's a duty of the state. s, do not use the material resource of the community, not to subserve the common good. it stands to reason. and therefore 39(b) is a very limited provision, which requires the state to act in a manner to subserve the common good. and therefore our humble submission is, that when you read and why the words "of the community" are used is very crucial in interpreting 39(b). because otherwise, it would have simply stated, that material resources should be distributed to serve the common good. it doesn't say that. it says material ownership and control of the material resource of the community, it must necessarily mean, in our humble submission, resources which are controlled by the state in some manner, which will subserve the common good. and of course, we leave aside 31c for the moment, this is the only consistent interpretation that can be given to 39(b). therefore, we are on both parts. first it should be, and then i'll come to the... touch upon the act also. there should be ownership and control of material resources. i do not want to dispute that a house is a material resource. no difficulty with that. but therefore, is it a material resource of the community for the purposes of article 39? in some other context, maybe. certainly. in a context, you may say that the housing is part of the community's assets, no difficulty. but when you are casting a duty on the state that use the resources of the community for common good, what are you trying to imply or mean is the submission that i'm seeking to make. and it can only mean goods controlled by state in some manner- directly, indirectly, etc. and that also follows, therefore and therefore, what justice krishna iyer says and mr. devrajan therefore, was rightly pointing out that if you construe it in this manner to say that 39(b) will also apply to private goods, then you have, what in fact, justice krishna iyer does advocate is that, please acquire private property and distribute it. that is too extreme a view, in my humble submission. it's too extreme, it's a marxist concept that you acquire everybody's land and give it to everybody else. that is not in our humble submission the intent of 39(b). it cannot be interpreted in that manner. the duty being cast on the state is not that go and acquire everybody's private property and give it to everybody else. that's not in our humble submission, what 39(b) is seeking to achieve. one of the public purposes under the land acquisition act, is to acquire land and give it to the persons who do not have a site or those who are landless in the sense, to give them a house. i'm grateful. and therefore ranganatha reddy says for that you don't need 31c, 31b, 31a. you don't need 39(b) and (c). that is inherent in eminent domain doctrine, because you can acquire land only for public purpose. if you acquire land, you acquire a coal mine, you acquire a estate, zamindari, give it to the tiller, that's your power under 245. nobody can take it away. in fact... material resources of the community must mean resources which are controlled by the state. i am deeply obliged. and that can and that is the only meaning. ... private property. that only meaning that would make sense because if you forget 31c for a moment, that's the only logical meaning that you can ascribe to 39(b), which is the duty of the state. the duty of the state is use your resources for public good. it is not to say that you please go and acquire everybody's private property. purpose of 39(b). if we read 39(b), like you want us to read, there's no purpose of 39(b). lordship, there is. purpose of 39(b). what is the purpose? if i fully understand, to remove equality. lordships. to have a fair, equal distribution. absolutely. even if 39(b) is not there, or we agree with the interpretation you want us to agree with, which does not include private property, how will you escape 38 clause 2? the state will still have power to do what it can, under 39(b). certainly. i have no difficulty. i am not at all suggesting for a moment. 31c argument we don't. in fact, what my lord is raised is precisely the point i wish to raise. it is of seminal importance, how my lords interprets 39(b). power, it's a duty. the power or duty under 39(b) must be exercised consistent with the rest of the constitution, including various restrictions on the powers of the state legislature or the central legislature. i have no quarrel, no difficulty, that state can acquire any land for public purpose, use it for various, but 39(b) is not saying you shall go and acquire all private properties and redistribute it. that's not our constitution. that may be a marxist constitution. our constitution is, you can acquire it. 300a exist. 39(b) has to be read in accordance with 300a. if my property is taken, you must give me proper compensation. you cannot give me a illusionary compensation. so, 39(b) duty, please use it for common good. no difficulty. but you can't say i will take it from one party and give it to another private party. that's not the intent of 39(b). how is a co-operative society a private party? i'll come to the act itself in a minute, because act there is chapter viii and chapter viii-a. in fact, viii-a, has come because of failure of the state. i'll just indicate that in a minute. so, if we don't accept the interpretation of 39(b), which has been placed by justice krishna iyer in ranganatha reddy's case, that would not render the act ipso facto, unconstitutional. no. it's just that the act would then have to withstand the scrutiny of article 14 and 19. i am deeply... i'm grateful. i'm grateful. that is all i was trying to say. that the power to pass legislation is there. it must meet the rest of the parameters of the constitution- 14, 19, 21, 300a and there are other provisions that we are relying on. now, only benefit was, under 31c, you have an additional protection. 14, 19 are out. 21 and 300a is still available. now that little protection goes away. that also after coelho, we don't know how my lords will take that view. what is the scope of challenge under 14, 19 also, that we'll see separately. but under, only article 31c, if 39(b) is sought to be subserved, only thing article 31c does is, remove the challenge under 14 and 19. rest of the challenges still remain. you say that you have no protection of 31c, because there's no nexus with 39(b). the law has to then meet the... past master under article 14 and 19. 14, 19 is... lordships, absolutely. but even without that i still have 21 and 300a, and after k. t. plantation... you say in this ranganatha reddy's case, that article 39(b) was not applicable. what was the reason given, because that is reversed by the supreme court? i'll take out the high court judgment. supreme court simply says, that you have a power to acquire. that has got nothing to do with 31c. you have to meet two requirements and two requirements alone. public purpose, fair compensation. high court, having upheld both these, should not have interfered. and that's the majority judgment. therefore, my test, of your power to acquire a property, will be two and only two, nothing else. if you meet this, then all these 14, 19, 21 challenges fall apart. you don't have to go there. that's what the majority says. so, it says, once i find reasonable compensation and public purpose, it is valid under 14, 19, 21 straightaway. all this is all irrelevant. therefore, we uphold the law. no, they struck it down. nationalization.. that's the high court. ladyship is right. on the ground that article 39(b) was not applicable to the exercise of power, after that legislation. therefore, if my lady permits... there are reasons given for that. absolutely. anything else now? yes. just one more point, about the legislation. there are two chapters, chapter viii and viii-a, and that's a little important. viii, cess was imposed from '76 onwards, by the... by mhada. the board was set up. 10%, i had to pay, that's the landlords, 15% by the tenants, of the circle rate. so, even if i'm getting some rs. 50 or rs. 100 rent, i have to pay cess on these properties from '76 onwards. and the reason for the cess was that mhada will collect the cess and repair all these buildings, because i'm not giving you the rental. i hope i'm making myself clear. and therefore, chapter viii put the obligation on mhada to find out how the property is dilapidated. mhada was given huge chunks of land. they have some 2000 acres, if i remember correctly, of land given. mhada had to carry out these repair obligations taking money from me. so, 10% of circle rate i pay, 15% tenants pay. mhada collects that money. they have to come on a yearly or whatever, a certain period, they have to come and check the strength of the building and whether it's dilapidated. it was mhada's duty to repair and then give it back to the landlords and the tenant. mhada, and those reports are also on record. mhada comes and says "we are incapable of doing this, although we'll continue to take the cess.
" that's why these are category a, cess building. so, they keep taking the money, and say, we can't do anything. and then they say, "because i have failed, now i will give it to the tenants.
" that's what has happened. and now, the requirement of dilapidated is gone in chapter viii-a. so, any building, 70 occupiers, may not even be tenants... occupier definition is something also we're challenging. go ahead and say, now, whoever, some trespasser is sitting there, he's part of 70%. he'll come and say, "i wanted your building.
you spent a lot of money despite no rent.
you kept it up, it's in great shape, but i want it.
i will take it. " that's chapter viii-a. my lords, in fact purpose, if 39(b), there was a purpose, chapter viii satisfies that, namely mhada has to spend money which they recovered from us to maintain the building. that would be public purpose. no difficulty. now, what they're doing is, we are incapable, they have given a report as we are incompetent and incapable and my words not theirs, but they effectively say that. and so therefore, you allow them to take over. so, that's the situation. therefore, chapter viii, i can understand, says, subserve public purpose, we will repair it, the landlord is not doing. and this whole situation is created by freezing the rent. now, if you give me freezing, even if you froze the rent, if at least you had given me the ability to raise the cost of my repairs, i would have carried out. you block me in every way. then you charge me cess. so, i am getting almost nothing by rent. then i'm paying 10% of circle rate to the government, for repair of my building, and then you say, now repair or not, let the tenant take it away. now, can an act of this sort be protected by 39(b)? my submission is known. 39(b) has to subserve the public good. public good will be, i can, my lord the chief justice mentioned, if you want to protect buildings, i understand. now, does viii-a say that only dilapidated buildings will be taken over? no. they say any building that 70% of their tenants want. therefore, it doesn't even subserve any purpose. what is happening, is just unfair. for 85 years now, rents have been frozen. i am obliged to keep my building in maintenance and good repair. but i'm not allowed to collect the money, and in addition, i have to pay the cess, and mhada says i can't repair it. so, now, give it away. now, these are all hard-earned money, all the reports, in fact, when we go to the smaller bench, five judges or wherever, my lords send us, we'll point all this out. their own report says, most landlords have put every bit of their hard-earned money to make their house. they were relying on the income of this house to sustain themselves. most of the landlords, specifically these buildings that we are concerned with, none of them can fend for themselves. in fact, the landlords here are the one who are poor. because they do not have earned, access. yeah, but i said this is what i'll be arguing. so, i'm entitled to say that. so therefore, i'm submitting that, we will be submitting, that in fact 39(b) purpose is not subserved in any way. this is your, so to say, conduct, and, if i may use the word 'politics of the state' that has created this situation, where you're punishing me for your own failures. you are unable to... and the presidential assent that the respondents will strongly rely on. the presidential assent says, i'm giving you this assent on the assumption that you will raise rents in future. this hon’ble court in malpe vishwanath acharya said, that you will raise rents in future. there is model... the union government, the parliament has passed the model rent act, which says over a period of time for these old rent act provisions, over a period of time, the rents will be increased so that over ten years, five years, you bring them in line with the present rate. now, making this mhada, it will be completely unconscionable to allow a law of this sort, where the failure is of the legislature not taking care of the situation, not taking care of the problem, and their own default, they want to correct by taking away my property. that's the situation. can it at all be covered by 39(b), is our submission. and therefore, once you see 39(b) in the context, namely directive principles, obligations of the state. these are not my obligations. they are your obligations, and you're in breach of your obligations under chapter viii. and having failed in your duty to maintain this building. now you can't trust chapter viii and say, now 100 times monthly and not even yearly rent. one month's rent, 100 times or rs. 50 rent, give 100 into 50. that rent is of 1940. correct. rent is of 1940. i'm obliged. you pay 100 times 1940 rent and we put all the wholesale price index, et cetera. just the inflation has gone up more than 1000%, 1000 times or something, and of course, the rental prices have gone up. and this is in fact, and my lord, the chief justice, respond to your question, all the reports of the government, respondent, state government, say that, in fact, all these provisions are the one affecting the housing stock in bombay. nobody is ready to build, nobody is ready to maintain, more supply is not coming, because you've created a situation which is unsustainable. so, to answer the question, and of course, we'll take that later. but to answer the 39(b) question also, these acts which are under challenge are the cost of the problem. they're not the solution. in fact, if they act reasonably, make proper changes, et cetera, the housing stock will increase, the tenants will have the money, landlords will have the money to repair them, keep them in good repair as they do it in other places. and therefore, just to summarize and conclude, my lords, our submission is 39(b) must be seen in the context of the entire constitution. i have all various other rights in the constitution. my land can be taken over in certain cases, no difficulty, but you must comply with all other requirements of the constitution. by this method of 39(b), you say now i want to distribute your land to some other private party, and i've taken it. that's not the interpretation that a constitution like ours can sustain. it must be, maybe in a marxist constitution, certainly, you take everybody's land and make it a communal land. and that's the marxist theory, certainly not under our constitution, which still has 300a, which possibly might be a higher right than the rights we had earlier, because now the right to property in k. t. plantation judgment, my lords have actually said that. 300a is now a higher right, it cannot be suspended at all, you cannot give illusionary compensation, you must give a fair and reasonable compensation, you must have a public purpose. then you can acquire a land. no difficulty. but therefore i submit my lords in conclusion, that 39(b), please interpret it in a manner that subserves the purpose of the constitution. read it holistically, read it with all the provisions of the constitution and certainly the only conclusion that can come is this is a duty of the state. it is not the power to take away a private party's land and give it to another. so, that's it my lords. i'm deeply grateful. please, my lord. before we had divided the work, i had myself prepared a small note on this aspect. i've taken the liberty of having it uploaded but, my lord, may i first address your lordships on two aspects? yes. may i address your lordships on two aspects before going there? the first is, i want to make some arguments in support of what my learned friends have said. my lord the second is what i want to argue a point on demurrer. my lord, i want to argue a point, accepting, that theoretically and academically, it is possible that property could form a part of 39(b) but that if you accept that, the distinction between private property and public property must effectively be at vanishing point. my lord, so i want to address that second argument before your lordships as well. so, my lord, these two. i believe, that no real reading of the directive principles chapter can really be understood, without a preface. my lord, as your lordships are well aware, that at the time of the constituent assembly and the formation of the constitution it was always envisaged that directive principles would be very much on the same footing as fundamental rights. my lord, the often colloquialism which is used is to say that fundamental rights are somehow superior to directive principles i just said that, that these are two wheels of . exactly, exactly. and therefore, my lord, it is always a matter of balance when we go to the directive principles, they've always got to be balanced with the other provisions in the constitution. but i think it is also important to remember that till 1978, we had the entrenched fundamental right of property, my lord, which was in 19(1)(f). my lord, and 31, which took into account the concept of eminent domain, that if a property is to be acquired, it could be acquired, not only for a public purpose and upon the payment of fair compensation. now, my lord, that came to be deleted for entirely different reasons in 1978. but when your lordships look at 39(b), in my respectful submission, it is important to bear in mind, that that is how the constitution first looked. so, on the one hand, we had the right to property, on the other hand, we had what was undoubtedly a social charter in the need, to my lord justice dhulia's point, to alleviate inequality and to distribute property. and any construction that we arrive at of 39(b) in my respectful submission must take into account this context. my lord, having said that, may i request your lordships just to see the section with me for a minute. i just want to point out to your lordships that there are three material parts of this section, but the first is what is to be distributed, is the ownership and control of, what is to be distributed, is the ownership and control of something else. so, there are two particular indicia of that something else, which is to be distributed ownership and control. and what that is, is, one compendious composite expression, the material resources of the community. the latter part, is that the distribution is to subserve the common goal. but that's not so important for the purpose of the current reading. but, it is my respectful submission, to your lordships, that, on my on my demurrer argument, when i address it, that my lord, the chief justice was not entirely wrong. i think it would be futile and academic, to try to propose a conceptual argument, that it is possible, that private property can be introduced into the concept of material resources of the community. but the real question to my mind, is what is the nature of that private property that will fit within this compendious expression, 'material resources of the community'. we know that it must have certain characteristics. it must be material resource. and, i have some definition to show your lordship of that, and it must be of the community. so, my lord, my learned friend's point... my learned friend's fees from today's appearance... your lordships said, distributed to taxation, separate provision for that - article 265. when my lady spoke of land acquisition, separate provision from that, originally my lord, and interestingly, in bhim singh ji's case, there was a challenge actually, to the urban land ceiling act. the challenge was on the 39(b) grounds, and actually, it was negative, on the grounds that the 31c protection, was available on the ground of 39(b), as i'll show my lady also from the high court. actually, justice untwalia's judgment, refers also to the challenge in the high court, which i'll just show my lady in a minute or so. but now to come back to this point. if we acknowledge the fact that private property can fit within the expression 'material resource of the community', it must satisfy all these requirements. it must be private property, which has the characteristics of being a resource, and it must be a material resource of the community. having said that, my lord, may i show your lordships my note? my lord, i've made some submissions in my note and please bear in mind, my note was slightly focused on a different point, and that's reflected in the chapter, but it really addresses this point. my lord, it is in the morning google link, at 00 or so, which was sent to your lordships. it's called chapter viii-a does not receive the protection of... sorry, just now... thank you. your lordships have it? my lords, para 2, but para 2 is what i've already made my submissions on... but can i take your lordship straightaway to paragraph 4? yes please, my lords. yes, my lord. yes, page 48. that's right. and if i can actually, to my lord, the chief justice's point. para 2 actually states it a lot better than i said it, my lord. may i just read it? can i just read it to your lordship, paragraph 2, my lord? state policy in article 39(b) has three ingredients. there must be a material resource. more importantly, it must be a material resource of the community. to my lord justice bindal's point, something which i'll just develop. my lord, if the material resources is not of the community, it is not the subject of the policy. there must be a distribution of the ownership and control of the material resource. article 39(b) does not say, that the material resources are to be distributed. mere distribution of material resources without distributing the element of ownership and control is not the subject of policy. so, the distribution, as i mentioned to your lordship, is with regard to ownership and control. the distribution must be such as to serve the common good, distribution which does not subserve the common good, is not the subject of the policy. i'll then skip. my lord, please come to paragraph 4. now my lord, some dictionary meanings, my lord, because we don't have any actual legal construction of these terms, 'material resource'. the dictionary meaning of resource and resources is "a means of...
your lordships have it? there is a means of supplying a deficiency, a stock or reserve which can be drawn, or when necessary available assets.
and plural, the collective means possessed by a country for its own support or defence example, countries with large natural resources.
so that's the definition with regard to resource, it's normally used in the context of community.
sometimes in plural, it is used in the context of state property, but it doesn't preclude, it being also of private ownership, as i'll come to.
'resource.' something which lies ready for use or that can be drawn upon for aid or to take care of a need.
the plural is available money or property, wealth and assets the plural is something that a country or state, et cetera, has that can be used to its advantage, natural resources, including coal and oil, a means of accomplishing something.
my lord, that's what webster says. now, article 39(b) uses the plural "resources", which brings in the national or community aspect of the meaning of resource that this meaning in article 39(b) is evident from the qualification of the community in the article, the meaning of the word "community" itself is a body of persons.
the word "material" as an adjective, in this context means important and essential.
material resources of the community can therefore mean natural resources, illustratively, which are those of the country or the nation or the means of production, which in a large sense can be said to be of a community, even though they are in private hands.
the concept negatives any property in which there is no interest of the community.
my lord in karnataka and ranganatha reddy, justice krishna cites the meaning of resources from a dictionary from black's dictionary and says, this.
money or any property that can be converted into supplies means of raising monies or supplies, capabilities of raising wealth or to supply necessary wants available means of capability of any kind.
this definition is no longer found in the dictionary.
it's not available. by itself this definition cannot be applied to the concept of 39(b) as it does not bring in the interest of the community as a resource.
then i've cited the observation, which your lordship already read.
i have pointed out that it has been followed elsewhere.
and in 4.10, my lord, what i said is this, this formulation of material resources is too widely stated.
private sources of meeting material needs are not material resources of the community, not everything of value in the world is a material resource.
the constitution does not embody a political or social theory that because the individual is a member of the community, his resources, however small and humble are necessary part of the community.
that is an interpretive argument based on this aspect of the matter.
my lord, just one last point that i have for your lordship.
to become a material resource of a community, a particular class of property must have some homogeneity, or it must have some common characteristic.
my lord, the housing stock that is under rent and subject to mhada acquisition is of the most diverse and varied kind.
my lord, if your lordships were to go to bombay, to perhaps what is the most affluent area of bombay, carmichael road, your lordship will find extremely wealthy people living in lavish style, in well-appointed buildings.
but on the other hand, if your lordships were to go to some of the ghettos of bombay, your lordships would find people almost at the point of destitution, who are also tenants.
so, the housing stock lacks a quality of homogeneity.
it is not possible to say that in every case, the housing stock, which is the subject of acquisition under viii-a can have a homogeneous nature, and therefore according to my respectful submission, can never fall within the definition of the material resource of the community.
i'm obliged. thank you. my lord, before coming to this...
evolved material resources, i will go to this article 366(12).
goods, is where the definition, because if we have to enlarge the definition of 39(b) to include everything, which will include a good also, all material, commodities and articles.
it means, by way of this interpretation, all material resources are different than the goods.
so therefore, now the advancement of the constitution of india, an amendment, now kindly have 17th amendment, because the right to property was always a thing, which was being taken away.
now, the 17th amendment, when it came to 31a, when the provision was made, if you have to take the property of someone, make the payment at the market value.
that was 17. therefore, that comes 44.
and the third one comes, the 73rd constitution amendment, which has made the country three tier system.
and in relation to that, i will be making my submission.
my lord may kindly have 31a, only to the extent of market value.
31a proviso. 'provided further where any law makes any provision of acquisition of a state comprises land personal cultivation...', whatever...
we know that urban land ceiling has gone.
so, there is no... because when we go to the kesavananda bharati, that was the concept of creating a new public order or social order.
now, with the advancement, after 75 years, we are into a different era, and we have come from nationalization to disinvestment.
so, the meaning what was there... because at that time, when we interpreted these laws, article 31 was there.
after 44th amendment, article 31 has gone, and that time our 19(1)(f) was there.
right to property was a fundamental right.
after that, now it is article 300a.
so, that... to that extent, kindly have 17th amendment, which says you have to pay the market value.
now, after that, my lord, kindly have, the article 243g, because after 73rd amendment, the power had been entrusted to the local self or the public, of managing the utility or any good.
to that extent, my brothers who have placed the subject -- now two chapters have been added, part ix and part ixa, of the constitution of india - power, authority and responsibility of panchayat.
this is for common good, not by giving it to the hand of certain number of persons by acquiring.
now, my lord, i pause for a minute.
my lord, justice manoj misra is there, my lord, justice dhulia is there, and even i have done some cases, where the properties under 20-point program were given to certain persons.
they paid some money by getting a transferable right and they sold it.
this is the hard reality of the era.
kindly have... 'power...' and i'm coming to these two part, (a) or (b), subject to the provisions of this constitution the legislature of a state may, by law, endow the panchayats with such powers and authority and may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon panchayats, at the appropriate level, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to, (a) the preparation of plans for economic development...
'. this is 39(b), and social justice.
second part, 'the implementation of schemes of the development...' what has been done in the state of west bengal, retrospectively from 1969, in the year 1981, definition of land has been enlarged to include, mill, factory, even the religious institutions have been brought in within the definition of land, and we apply with that.
so to that extent, what i respectfully submit, whenever 39(b) comes there has to be distribution.
by whom? now, in the backdrop of this, i read article 39.
and then i will come to the schedule 11 and 12.
in bombay, one of the feature is the slum, which comes under schedule 12, in the constitution of india.
so we are interpreting the... because in sanjeev coke at para 20, this hon'ble court said, you cannot take that under 39(b), you cannot take the entire industry.
there is a cross. so, therefore you cannot make a person without livelihood.
now, concept is this, i will read two paragraphs.
239(b). 'the ownership and control of all material resources'.
if the material resources is a good, then the material resources is something different, which is to be used for a common public, for a common larger benefit and interest.
not for the merely purpose of living or housing or just for the purpose of making the social standard.
it is something very, very big step, which has to be...
because at the time of the nationalization cases, certain companies were in the hand of britishers.
what is the point that you are trying to make?
now, what i submit, number one - 'material resources' is a word which is to be used in a very careful manner, to include only the resources which are essential to the society and not the private properties.
that point has been made before. now two 'concentration of the wealth'.
concentration of the wealth, not by taking away the right of a private person depriving his right to livelihood, and give it to someone else.
applying the ceiling limit, or applying a house, or taking away the right of a livelihood of someone, the concentration, suppose in the west bengal, the ceiling limit has been imposed with effect from 1969.
now after that, the ceiling limit with the retrospective effect, our houses and property, main factory, everything is being taken away.
so, to that extent, in that context what is the 'concentration of the wealth'?
now, in my written submission, i have dealt with the definition part.
i leave it to that. now, second submission, which i am going to make, my lord, 300a- 'right to life with the right of livelihood' and 300a, because, now it is a constitutional right.
now constitutional right is a right after the advancement of so much of the jurisprudence of the property, it cannot be taken away on the name of merely concentration and applying the yard stick, which was in the year 1971 or '72. for that purpose, i merely read one paragraph from sanjeev coke. what is the point that you are making now? now, the concept i'm making, this hon'ble court never approved that state has the power to acquire everything at their own.
39(b) rider came in sanjeev coke. the learned counsel...
at page 2317, the learned counsel submitted article 39(b) would be attracted, if the industry as a whole are they nationalized.
not if only a part of industry.
according to him, all the coke owned plant or whatever, they existed to be nationalized, but no privately owned property.
we are unable to see any for the distribution between public, private and joint sector, range of any nationalization state policy, inherently inappropriate subject, scales of justice are not designed to weigh competing social economic factor in such a matter.
legislative wisdom must prevail with the judicial review, must abstain.
to that extent, what i respectfully submit, did the right to property, which is now a constitutional right, does not come within the purview of material resources.
that is my submission. property is not a material resource?
but, property if owned for a livelihood, if owned for livelihood.
if a person is having a property which is not for livelihood, other than for livelihood.
there has to be a distinction between a livelihood of a property, and a property which is not for livelihood.
suppose in bombay, i have one house and that house has been taken away.
that will not be for the purpose of common good, by depriving me from my right of livelihood.
it can be. suppose if you have house in 200 acres, then it will be taken away?
my lord house for my right to livelihood, then article 21 survives.
for equal distribution. for equal distribution, then the law has to be there that nobody can have a house of more than 50 yards.
equal distribution, including me, including me, not by taking away my right.
thank you, mr. sharma. so, tomorrow morning, we'll start with the learned attorney general, tomorrow morning.
your lordships can we just have 10 minutes of your lordships' time?
sorry? we just want to make very brief submissions tomorrow morning.
ten minutes, my lord, between the two of us.
alright, 10 minutes in the morning and then...
we'll share. grateful. the notes and compilations sent by mr. andhyarujina and mr. devrajan are without volume numbers.
so please make sure that you put them all together in volume numbers, otherwise we'll never know.
you can actually put yours as, give them specific volume numbers and then share it with the other side.
so, they will also know. with your lords kind permission because what we have written, we have been asked not to get into it.
can we edit them and send it to you, my lords?
because, see, we have gone on the basis that 31c, we could do argue.
lot of matters are related to 31c.
now we have not been allowed to argue that.
but, do it by the evening today by say 8 o'clock in the night give it to the court master.
and you can send the message to the court master when you have added it.
otherwise, he doesn't know that you have added it.
so by 8 o'clock make sure all the edited compilations and volume wise are available with the court master. please, my lord. obliged.
